PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: Socrates and Menexenus.

SOCRATES: Whence come you, Menexenus? Are you from the Agora?

MENEXENUS: Yes, Socrates; I have been at the Council.

SOCRATES: And what might you be doing at the Council? And yet I need hardly
ask, for I see that you, believing yourself to have arrived at the end of
education and of philosophy, and to have had enough of them, are mounting
upwards to things higher still, and, though rather young for the post, are
intending to govern us elder men, like the rest of your family, which has
always provided some one who kindly took care of us.

MENEXENUS: Yes, Socrates, I shall be ready to hold office, if you allow and
advise that I should, but not if you think otherwise. I went to the council
chamber because I heard that the Council was about to choose some one who was
to speak over the dead. For you know that there is to be a public funeral?

SOCRATES: Yes, I know. And whom did they choose?

MENEXENUS: No one; they delayed the election until tomorrow, but I believe
that either Archinus or Dion will be chosen.

SOCRATES: O Menexenus! Death in battle is certainly in many respects a noble
thing. The dead man gets a fine and costly funeral, although he may have been
poor, and an elaborate speech is made over him by a wise man who has long ago
prepared what he has to say, although he who is praised may not have been good
for much. The speakers praise him for what he has done and for what he has not
done--that is the beauty of them--and they steal away our souls with their
embellished words; in every conceivable form they praise the city; and they
praise those who died in war, and all our ancestors who went before us; and
they praise ourselves also who are still alive, until I feel quite elevated by
their laudations, and I stand listening to their words, Menexenus, and become
enchanted by them, and all in a moment I imagine myself to have become a
greater and nobler and finer man than I was before. And if, as often happens,
there are any foreigners who accompany me to the speech, I become suddenly
conscious of having a sort of triumph over them, and they seem to experience a
corresponding feeling of admiration at me, and at the greatness of the city,
which appears to them, when they are under the influence of the speaker, more
wonderful than ever. This consciousness of dignity lasts me more than three
days, and not until the fourth or fifth day do I come to my senses and know
where I am; in the meantime I have been living in the Islands of the Blest.
Such is the art of our rhetoricians, and in such manner does the sound of
their words keep ringing in my ears.

MENEXENUS: You are always making fun of the rhetoricians, Socrates; this time,
however, I am inclined to think that the speaker who is chosen will not have
much to say, for he has been called upon to speak at a moment's notice, and he
will be compelled almost to improvise.

SOCRATES: But why, my friend, should he not have plenty to say? Every
rhetorician has speeches ready made; nor is there any difficulty in
improvising that sort of stuff. Had the orator to praise Athenians among
Peloponnesians, or Peloponnesians among Athenians, he must be a good
rhetorician who could succeed and gain credit. But there is no difficulty in a
man's winning applause when he is contending for fame among the persons whom
he is praising.

MENEXENUS: Do you think not, Socrates?

SOCRATES: Certainly 'not.'

MENEXENUS: Do you think that you could speak yourself if there should be a
necessity, and if the Council were to choose you?

SOCRATES: That I should be able to speak is no great wonder, Menexenus,
considering that I have an excellent mistress in the art of rhetoric,--she who
has made so many good speakers, and one who was the best among all the
Hellenes--Pericles, the son of Xanthippus.

MENEXENUS: And who is she? I suppose that you mean Aspasia.

SOCRATES: Yes, I do; and besides her I had Connus, the son of Metrobius, as a
master, and he was my master in music, as she was in rhetoric. No wonder that
a man who has received such an education should be a finished speaker; even
the pupil of very inferior masters, say, for example, one who had learned
music of Lamprus, and rhetoric of Antiphon the Rhamnusian, might make a figure
if he were to praise the Athenians among the Athenians.

MENEXENUS: And what would you be able to say if you had to speak?

SOCRATES: Of my own wit, most likely nothing; but yesterday I heard Aspasia
composing a funeral oration about these very dead. For she had been told, as
you were saying, that the Athenians were going to choose a speaker, and she
repeated to me the sort of speech which he should deliver, partly improvising
and partly from previous thought, putting together fragments of the funeral
oration which Pericles spoke, but which, as I believe, she composed.

MENEXENUS: And can you remember what Aspasia said?

SOCRATES: I ought to be able, for she taught me, and she was ready to strike
me because I was always forgetting.

MENEXENUS: Then why will you not rehearse what she said?

SOCRATES: Because I am afraid that my mistress may be angry with me if I
publish her speech.

MENEXENUS: Nay, Socrates, let us have the speech, whether Aspasia's or any one
else's, no matter. I hope that you will oblige me.

SOCRATES: But I am afraid that you will laugh at me if I continue the games of
youth in old age.

MENEXENUS: Far otherwise, Socrates; let us by all means have the speech.

SOCRATES: Truly I have such a disposition to oblige you, that if you bid me
dance naked I should not like to refuse, since we are alone. Listen then: If I
remember rightly, she began as follows, with the mention of the
dead:--

There is a tribute of deeds and of words. The departed have already had the
first, when going forth on their destined journey they were attended on their
way by the state and by their friends; the tribute of words remains to be
given to them, as is meet and by law ordained. For noble words are a memorial
and a crown of noble actions, which are given to the doers of them by the
hearers. A word is needed which will duly praise the dead and gently admonish
the living, exhorting the brethren and descendants of the departed to imitate
their virtue, and consoling their fathers and mothers and the survivors, if
any, who may chance to be alive of the previous generation. What sort of a
word will this be, and how shall we rightly begin the praises of these brave
men? In their life they rejoiced their own friends with their valour, and
their death they gave in exchange for the salvation of the living. And I think
that we should praise them in the order in which nature made them good, for
they were good because they were sprung from good fathers. Wherefore let us
first of all praise the goodness of their birth; secondly, their nurture and
education; and then let us set forth how noble their actions were, and how
worthy of the education which they had received.

And first as to their birth. Their ancestors were not strangers, nor are these
their descendants sojourners only, whose fathers have come from another
country; but they are the children of the soil, dwelling and living in their
own land. And the country which brought them up is not like other countries, a
stepmother to her children, but their own true mother; she bore them and
nourished them and received them, and in her bosom they now repose. It is meet
and right, therefore, that we should begin by praising the land which is their
mother, and that will be a way of praising their noble birth.

The country is worthy to be praised, not only by us, but by all mankind;
first, and above all, as being dear to the Gods. This is proved by the strife
and contention of the Gods respecting her. And ought not the country which the
Gods praise to be praised by all mankind? The second praise which may be
fairly claimed by her, is that at the time when the whole earth was sending
forth and creating diverse animals, tame and wild, she our mother was free and
pure from savage monsters, and out of all animals selected and brought forth
man, who is superior to the rest in understanding, and alone has justice and
religion. And a great proof that she brought forth the common ancestors of us
and of the departed, is that she provided the means of support for her
offspring. For as a woman proves her motherhood by giving milk to her young
ones , so did this our
land prove that she was the mother of men, for in those days she alone and
first of all brought forth wheat and barley for human food, which is the best
and noblest sustenance for man, whom she regarded as her true offspring. And
these are truer proofs of motherhood in a country than in a woman, for the
woman in her conception and generation is but the imitation of the earth, and
not the earth of the woman. And of the fruit of the earth she gave a plenteous
supply, not only to her own, but to others also; and afterwards she made the
olive to spring up to be a boon to her children, and to help them in their
toils. And when she had herself nursed them and brought them up to manhood,
she gave them Gods to be their rulers and teachers, whose names are well
known, and need not now be repeated. They are the Gods who first ordered our
lives, and instructed us in the arts for the supply of our daily needs, and
taught us the acquisition and use of arms for the defence of the country.

Thus born into the world and thus educated, the ancestors of the departed
lived and made themselves a government, which I ought briefly to commemorate.
For government is the nurture of man, and the government of good men is good,
and of bad men bad. And I must show that our ancestors were trained under a
good government, and for this reason they were good, and our contemporaries
are also good, among whom our departed friends are to be reckoned. Then as
now, and indeed always, from that time to this, speaking generally, our
government was an aristocracy--a form of government which receives various
names, according to the fancies of men, and is sometimes called democracy, but
is really an aristocracy or government of the best which has the approval of
the many. For kings we have always had, first hereditary and then elected, and
authority is mostly in the hands of the people, who dispense offices and power
to those who appear to be most deserving of them. Neither is a man rejected
from weakness or poverty or obscurity of origin, nor honoured by reason of the
opposite, as in other states, but there is one principle--he who appears to be
wise and good is a governor and ruler. The basis of this our government is
equality of birth; for other states are made up of all sorts and unequal
conditions of men, and therefore their governments are unequal; there are
tyrannies and there are oligarchies, in which the one party are slaves and the
others masters. But we and our citizens are brethren, the children all of one
mother, and we do not think it right to be one another's masters or servants;
but the natural equality of birth compels us to seek for legal equality, and
to recognize no superiority except in the reputation of virtue and wisdom.

And so their and our fathers, and these, too, our brethren, being nobly born
and having been brought up in all freedom, did both in their public and
private capacity many noble deeds famous over the whole world. They were the
deeds of men who thought that they ought to fight both against Hellenes for
the sake of Hellenes on behalf of freedom, and against barbarians in the
common interest of Hellas. Time would fail me to tell of their defence of
their country against the invasion of Eumolpus and the Amazons, or of their
defence of the Argives against the Cadmeians, or of the Heracleids against the
Argives; besides, the poets have already declared in song to all mankind their
glory, and therefore any commemoration of their deeds in prose which we might
attempt would hold a second place. They already have their reward, and I say
no more of them; but there are other worthy deeds of which no poet has
worthily sung, and which are still wooing the poet's muse. Of these I am bound
to make honourable mention, and shall invoke others to sing of them also in
lyric and other strains, in a manner becoming the actors. And first I will
tell how the Persians, lords of Asia, were enslaving Europe, and how the
children of this land, who were our fathers, held them back. Of these I will
speak first, and praise their valour, as is meet and fitting. He who would
rightly estimate them should place himself in thought at that time, when the
whole of Asia was subject to the third king of Persia. The first king, Cyrus,
by his valour freed the Persians, who were his countrymen, and subjected the
Medes, who were their lords, and he ruled over the rest of Asia, as far as
Egypt; and after him came his son, who ruled all the accessible part of Egypt
and Libya; the third king was Darius, who extended the land boundaries of the
empire to Scythia, and with his fleet held the sea and the islands. None
presumed to be his equal; the minds of all men were enthralled by him--so many
and mighty and warlike nations had the power of Persia subdued. Now Darius had
a quarrel against us and the Eretrians, because, as he said, we had conspired
against Sardis, and he sent 500,000 men in transports and vessels of war, and
300 ships, and Datis as commander, telling him to bring the Eretrians and
Athenians to the king, if he wished to keep his head on his shoulders. He
sailed against the Eretrians, who were reputed to be amongst the noblest and
most warlike of the Hellenes of that day, and they were numerous, but he
conquered them all in three days; and when he had conquered them, in order
that no one might escape, he searched the whole country after this manner: his
soldiers, coming to the borders of Eretria and spreading from sea to sea,
joined hands and passed through the whole country, in order that they might be
able to tell the king that no one had escaped them. And from Eretria they went
to Marathon with a like intention, expecting to bind the Athenians in the same
yoke of necessity in which they had bound the Eretrians. Having effected one-
half of their purpose, they were in the act of attempting the other, and none
of the Hellenes dared to assist either the Eretrians or the Athenians, except
the Lacedaemonians, and they arrived a day too late for the battle; but the
rest were panic-stricken and kept quiet, too happy in having escaped for a
time. He who has present to his mind that conflict will know what manner of
men they were who received the onset of the barbarians at Marathon, and
chastened the pride of the whole of Asia, and by the victory which they gained
over the barbarians first taught other men that the power of the Persians was
not invincible, but that hosts of men and the multitude of riches alike yield
to valour. And I assert that those men are the fathers not only of ourselves,
but of our liberties and of the liberties of all who are on the continent, for
that was the action to which the Hellenes looked back when they ventured to
fight for their own safety in the battles which ensued: they became disciples
of the men of Marathon. To them, therefore, I assign in my speech the first
place, and the second to those who fought and conquered in the sea fights at
Salamis and Artemisium; for of them, too, one might have many things to say--
of the assaults which they endured by sea and land, and how they repelled
them. I will mention only that act of theirs which appears to me to be the
noblest, and which followed that of Marathon and came nearest to it; for the
men of Marathon only showed the Hellenes that it was possible to ward off the
barbarians by land, the many by the few; but there was no proof that they
could be defeated by ships, and at sea the Persians retained the reputation of
being invincible in numbers and wealth and skill and strength. This is the
glory of the men who fought at sea, that they dispelled the second terror
which had hitherto possessed the Hellenes, and so made the fear of numbers,
whether of ships or men, to cease among them. And so the soldiers of Marathon
and the sailors of Salamis became the schoolmasters of Hellas; the one
teaching and habituating the Hellenes not to fear the barbarians at sea, and
the others not to fear them by land. Third in order, for the number and valour
of the combatants, and third in the salvation of Hellas, I place the battle of
Plataea. And now the Lacedaemonians as well as the Athenians took part in the
struggle; they were all united in this greatest and most terrible conflict of
all; wherefore their virtues will be celebrated in times to come, as they are
now celebrated by us. But at a later period many Hellenic tribes were still on
the side of the barbarians, and there was a report that the great king was
going to make a new attempt upon the Hellenes, and therefore justice requires
that we should also make mention of those who crowned the previous work of our
salvation, and drove and purged away all barbarians from the sea. These were
the men who fought by sea at the river Eurymedon, and who went on the
expedition to Cyprus, and who sailed to Egypt and divers other places; and
they should be gratefully remembered by us, because they compelled the king in
fear for himself to look to his own safety instead of plotting the destruction
of Hellas.

And so the war against the barbarians was fought out to the end by the whole
city on their own behalf, and on behalf of their countrymen. There was peace,
and our city was held in honour; and then, as prosperity makes men jealous,
there succeeded a jealousy of her, and jealousy begat envy, and so she became
engaged against her will in a war with the Hellenes. On the breaking out of
war, our citizens met the Lacedaemonians at Tanagra, and fought for the
freedom of the Boeotians; the issue was doubtful, and was decided by the
engagement which followed. For when the Lacedaemonians had gone on their way,
leaving the Boeotians, whom they were aiding, on the third day after the
battle of Tanagra, our countrymen conquered at Oenophyta, and righteously
restored those who had been unrighteously exiled. And they were the first
after the Persian war who fought on behalf of liberty in aid of Hellenes
against Hellenes; they were brave men, and freed those whom they aided, and
were the first too who were honourably interred in this sepulchre by the
state. Afterwards there was a mighty war, in which all the Hellenes joined,
and devastated our country, which was very ungrateful of them; and our
countrymen, after defeating them in a naval engagement and taking their
leaders, the Spartans, at Sphagia, when they might have destroyed them, spared
their lives, and gave them back, and made peace, considering that they should
war with the fellow-countrymen only until they gained a victory over them, and
not because of the private anger of the state destroy the common interest of
Hellas; but that with barbarians they should war to the death. Worthy of
praise are they also who waged this war, and are here interred; for they
proved, if any one doubted the superior prowess of the Athenians in the former
war with the barbarians, that their doubts had no foundation--showing by their
victory in the civil war with Hellas, in which they subdued the other chief
state of the Hellenes, that they could conquer single-handed those with whom
they had been allied in the war against the barbarians. After the peace there
followed a third war, which was of a terrible and desperate nature, and in
this many brave men who are here interred lost their lives--many of them had
won victories in Sicily, whither they had gone over the seas to fight for the
liberties of the Leontines, to whom they were bound by oaths; but, owing to
the distance, the city was unable to help them, and they lost heart and came
to misfortune, their very enemies and opponents winning more renown for valour
and temperance than the friends of others. Many also fell in naval engagements
at the Hellespont, after having in one day taken all the ships of the enemy,
and defeated them in other naval engagements. And what I call the terrible and
desperate nature of the war, is that the other Hellenes, in their extreme
animosity towards the city, should have entered into negotiations with their
bitterest enemy, the king of Persia, whom they, together with us, had
expelled;--him, without us, they again brought back, barbarian against
Hellenes, and all the hosts, both of Hellenes and barbarians, were united
against Athens. And then shone forth the power and valour of our city. Her
enemies had supposed that she was exhausted by the war, and our ships were
blockaded at Mitylene. But the citizens themselves embarked, and came to the
rescue with sixty other ships, and their valour was confessed of all men, for
they conquered their enemies and delivered their friends. And yet by some evil
fortune they were left to perish at sea, and therefore are not interred here.
Ever to be remembered and honoured are they, for by their valour not only that
sea-fight was won for us, but the entire war was decided by them, and through
them the city gained the reputation of being invincible, even though attacked
by all mankind. And that reputation was a true one, for the defeat which came
upon us was our own doing. We were never conquered by others, and to this day
we are still unconquered by them; but we were our own conquerors, and received
defeat at our own hands. Afterwards there was quiet and peace abroad, but
there sprang up war at home; and, if men are destined to have civil war, no
one could have desired that his city should take the disorder in a milder
form. How joyful and natural was the reconciliation of those who came from the
Piraeus and those who came from the city; with what moderation did they order
the war against the tyrants in Eleusis, and in a manner how unlike what the
other Hellenes expected! And the reason of this gentleness was the veritable
tie of blood, which created among them a friendship as of kinsmen, faithful
not in word only, but in deed. And we ought also to remember those who then
fell by one another's hands, and on such occasions as these to reconcile them
with sacrifices and prayers, praying to those who have power over them, that
they may be reconciled even as we are reconciled. For they did not attack one
another out of malice or enmity, but they were unfortunate. And that such was
the fact we ourselves are witnesses, who are of the same race with them, and
have mutually received and granted forgiveness of what we have done and
suffered. After this there was perfect peace, and the city had rest; and her
feeling was that she forgave the barbarians, who had severely suffered at her
hands and severely retaliated, but that she was indignant at the ingratitude
of the Hellenes, when she remembered how they had received good from her and
returned evil, having made common cause with the barbarians, depriving her of
the ships which had once been their salvation, and dismantling our walls,
which had preserved their own from falling. She thought that she would no
longer defend the Hellenes, when enslaved either by one another or by the
barbarians, and did accordingly. This was our feeling, while the
Lacedaemonians were thinking that we who were the champions of liberty had
fallen, and that their business was to subject the remaining Hellenes. And why
should I say more? for the events of which I am speaking happened not long ago
and we can all of us remember how the chief peoples of Hellas, Argives and
Boeotians and Corinthians, came to feel the need of us, and, what is the
greatest miracle of all, the Persian king himself was driven to such extremity
as to come round to the opinion, that from this city, of which he was the
destroyer, and from no other, his salvation would proceed.

And if a person desired to bring a deserved accusation against our city, he
would find only one charge which he could justly urge--that she was too
compassionate and too favourable to the weaker side. And in this instance she
was not able to hold out or keep her resolution of refusing aid to her
injurers when they were being enslaved, but she was softened, and did in fact
send out aid, and delivered the Hellenes from slavery, and they were free
until they afterwards enslaved themselves. Whereas, to the great king she
refused to give the assistance of the state, for she could not forget the
trophies of Marathon and Salamis and Plataea; but she allowed exiles and
volunteers to assist him, and they were his salvation. And she herself, when
she was compelled, entered into the war, and built walls and ships, and fought
with the Lacedaemonians on behalf of the Parians. Now the king fearing this
city and wanting to stand aloof, when he saw the Lacedaemonians growing weary
of the war at sea, asked of us, as the price of his alliance with us and the
other allies, to give up the Hellenes in Asia, whom the Lacedaemonians had
previously handed over to him, he thinking that we should refuse, and that
then he might have a pretence for withdrawing from us. About the other allies
he was mistaken, for the Corinthians and Argives and Boeotians, and the other
states, were quite willing to let them go, and swore and covenanted, that, if
he would pay them money, they would make over to him the Hellenes of the
continent, and we alone refused to give them up and swear. Such was the
natural nobility of this city, so sound and healthy was the spirit of freedom
among us, and the instinctive dislike of the barbarian, because we are pure
Hellenes, having no admixture of barbarism in us. For we are not like many
others, descendants of Pelops or Cadmus or Egyptus or Danaus, who are by
nature barbarians, and yet pass for Hellenes, and dwell in the midst of us;
but we are pure Hellenes, uncontaminated by any foreign element, and therefore
the hatred of the foreigner has passed unadulterated into the life-blood of
the city. And so, notwithstanding our noble sentiments, we were again
isolated, because we were unwilling to be guilty of the base and unholy act of
giving up Hellenes to barbarians. And we were in the same case as when we were
subdued before; but, by the favour of Heaven, we managed better, for we ended
the war without the loss of our ships or walls or colonies; the enemy was only
too glad to be quit of us. Yet in this war we lost many brave men, such as
were those who fell owing to the ruggedness of the ground at the battle of
Corinth, or by treason at Lechaeum. Brave men, too, were those who delivered
the Persian king, and drove the Lacedaemonians from the sea. I remind you of
them, and you must celebrate them together with me, and do honour to their
memories.

Such were the actions of the men who are here interred, and of others who have
died on behalf of their country; many and glorious things I have spoken of
them, and there are yet many more and more glorious things remaining to be
told--many days and nights would not suffice to tell of them. Let them not be
forgotten, and let every man remind their descendants that they also are
soldiers who must not desert the ranks of their ancestors, or from cowardice
fall behind. Even as I exhort you this day, and in all future time, whenever I
meet with any of you, shall continue to remind and exhort you, O ye sons of
heroes, that you strive to be the bravest of men. And I think that I ought now
to repeat what your fathers desired to have said to you who are their
survivors, when they went out to battle, in case anything happened to them. I
will tell you what I heard them say, and what, if they had only speech, they
would fain be saying, judging from what they then said. And you must imagine
that you hear them saying what I now repeat to you:--

'Sons, the event proves that your fathers were brave men; for we might have
lived dishonourably, but have preferred to die honourably rather than bring
you and your children into disgrace, and rather than dishonour our own fathers
and forefathers; considering that life is not life to one who is a dishonour
to his race, and that to such a one neither men nor Gods are friendly, either
while he is on the earth or after death in the world below. Remember our
words, then, and whatever is your aim let virtue be the condition of the
attainment of your aim, and know that without this all possessions and
pursuits are dishonourable and evil. For neither does wealth bring honour to
the owner, if he be a coward; of such a one the wealth belongs to another, and
not to himself. Nor does beauty and strength of body, when dwelling in a base
and cowardly man, appear comely, but the reverse of comely, making the
possessor more conspicuous, and manifesting forth his cowardice. And all
knowledge, when separated from justice and virtue, is seen to be cunning and
not wisdom; wherefore make this your first and last and constant and all-
absorbing aim, to exceed, if possible, not only us but all your ancestors in
virtue; and know that to excel you in virtue only brings us shame, but that to
be excelled by you is a source of happiness to us. And we shall most likely be
defeated, and you will most likely be victors in the contest, if you learn so
to order your lives as not to abuse or waste the reputation of your ancestors,
knowing that to a man who has any self-respect, nothing is more dishonourable
than to be honoured, not for his own sake, but on account of the reputation of
his ancestors. The honour of parents is a fair and noble treasure to their
posterity, but to have the use of a treasure of wealth and honour, and to
leave none to your successors, because you have neither money nor reputation
of your own, is alike base and dishonourable. And if you follow our precepts
you will be received by us as friends, when the hour of destiny brings you
hither; but if you neglect our words and are disgraced in your lives, no one
will welcome or receive you. This is the message which is to be delivered to
our children.

'Some of us have fathers and mothers still living, and we would urge them, if,
as is likely, we shall die, to bear the calamity as lightly as possible, and
not to condole with one another; for they have sorrows enough, and will not
need any one to stir them up. While we gently heal their wounds, let us remind
them that the Gods have heard the chief part of their prayers; for they
prayed, not that their children might live for ever, but that they might be
brave and renowned. And this, which is the greatest good, they have attained.
A mortal man cannot expect to have everything in his own life turning out
according to his will; and they, if they bear their misfortunes bravely, will
be truly deemed brave fathers of the brave. But if they give way to their
sorrows, either they will be suspected of not being our parents, or we of not
being such as our panegyrists declare. Let not either of the two alternatives
happen, but rather let them be our chief and true panegyrists, who show in
their lives that they are true men, and had men for their sons. Of old the
saying, "Nothing too much," appeared to be, and really was, well said. For he
whose happiness rests with himself, if possible, wholly, and if not, as far as
is possible,--who is not hanging in suspense on other men, or changing with
the vicissitude of their fortune,--has his life ordered for the best. He is
the temperate and valiant and wise; and when his riches come and go, when his
children are given and taken away, he will remember the proverb--"Neither
rejoicing overmuch nor grieving overmuch," for he relies upon himself. And
such we would have our parents to be--that is our word and wish, and as such
we now offer ourselves, neither lamenting overmuch, nor fearing overmuch, if
we are to die at this time. And we entreat our fathers and mothers to retain
these feelings throughout their future life, and to be assured that they will
not please us by sorrowing and lamenting over us. But, if the dead have any
knowledge of the living, they will displease us most by making themselves
miserable and by taking their misfortunes too much to heart, and they will
please us best if they bear their loss lightly and temperately. For our life
will have the noblest end which is vouchsafed to man, and should be glorified
rather than lamented. And if they will direct their minds to the care and
nurture of our wives and children, they will soonest forget their misfortunes,
and live in a better and nobler way, and be dearer to us.

'This is all that we have to say to our families: and to the state we would
say--Take care of our parents and of our sons: let her worthily cherish the
old age of our parents, and bring up our sons in the right way. But we know
that she will of her own accord take care of them, and does not need any
exhortation of ours.'

This, O ye children and parents of the dead, is the message which they bid us
deliver to you, and which I do deliver with the utmost seriousness. And in
their name I beseech you, the children, to imitate your fathers, and you,
parents, to be of good cheer about yourselves; for we will nourish your age,
and take care of you both publicly and privately in any place in which one of
us may meet one of you who are the parents of the dead. And the care of you
which the city shows, you know yourselves; for she has made provision by law
concerning the parents and children of those who die in war; the highest
authority is specially entrusted with the duty of watching over them above all
other citizens, and they will see that your fathers and mothers have no wrong
done to them. The city herself shares in the education of the children,
desiring as far as it is possible that their orphanhood may not be felt by
them; while they are children she is a parent to them, and when they have
arrived at man's estate she sends them to their several duties, in full armour
clad; and bringing freshly to their minds the ways of their fathers, she
places in their hands the instruments of their fathers' virtues; for the sake
of the omen, she would have them from the first begin to rule over their own
houses arrayed in the strength and arms of their fathers. And as for the dead,
she never ceases honouring them, celebrating in common for all rites which
become the property of each; and in addition to this, holding gymnastic and
equestrian contests, and musical festivals of every sort. She is to the dead
in the place of a son and heir, and to their sons in the place of a father,
and to their parents and elder kindred in the place of a guardian--ever and
always caring for them. Considering this, you ought to bear your calamity the
more gently; for thus you will be most endeared to the dead and to the living,
and your sorrows will heal and be healed. And now do you and all, having
lamented the dead in common according to the law, go your ways.

You have heard, Menexenus, the oration of Aspasia the Milesian.

MENEXENUS: Truly, Socrates, I marvel that Aspasia, who is only a woman, should
be able to compose such a speech; she must be a rare one.

SOCRATES: Well, if you are incredulous, you may come with me and hear her.

MENEXENUS: I have often met Aspasia, Socrates, and know what she is like.

SOCRATES: Well, and do you not admire her, and are you not grateful for her
speech?

MENEXENUS: Yes, Socrates, I am very grateful to her or to him who told you,
and still more to you who have told me.

SOCRATES: Very good. But you must take care not to tell of me, and then at
some future time I will repeat to you many other excellent political speeches
of hers.

MENEXENUS: Fear not, only let me hear them, and I will keep the secret.

SOCRATES: Then I will keep my promise.