PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: Theodorus, Theaetetus, Socrates. An Eleatic Stranger,
whom Theodorus and Theaetetus bring with them. The younger Socrates, who is a
silent auditor.

THEODORUS: Here we are, Socrates, true to our agreement of yesterday; and we
bring with us a stranger from Elea, who is a disciple of Parmenides and Zeno,
and a true philosopher.

SOCRATES: Is he not rather a god, Theodorus, who comes to us in the disguise
of a stranger? For Homer says that all the gods, and especially the god of
strangers, are companions of the meek and just, and visit the good and evil
among men. And may not your companion be one of those higher powers, a cross-
examining deity, who has come to spy out our weakness in argument, and to
cross-examine us?

THEODORUS: Nay, Socrates, he is not one of the disputatious sort--he is too
good for that. And, in my opinion, he is not a god at all; but divine he
certainly is, for this is a title which I should give to all philosophers.

SOCRATES: Capital, my friend! and I may add that they are almost as hard to be
discerned as the gods. For the true philosophers, and such as are not merely
made up for the occasion, appear in various forms unrecognized by the
ignorance of men, and they 'hover about cities,' as Homer declares, looking
from above upon human life; and some think nothing of them, and others can
never think enough; and sometimes they appear as statesmen, and sometimes as
sophists; and then, again, to many they seem to be no better than madmen. I
should like to ask our Eleatic friend, if he would tell us, what is thought
about them in Italy, and to whom the terms are applied.

THEODORUS: What terms?

SOCRATES: Sophist, statesman, philosopher.

THEODORUS: What is your difficulty about them, and what made you ask?

SOCRATES: I want to know whether by his countrymen they are regarded as one or
two; or do they, as the names are three, distinguish also three kinds, and
assign one to each name?

THEODORUS: I dare say that the Stranger will not object to discuss the
question. What do you say, Stranger?

STRANGER: I am far from objecting, Theodorus, nor have I any difficulty in
replying that by us they are regarded as three. But to define precisely the
nature of each of them is by no means a slight or easy task.

THEODORUS: You have happened to light, Socrates, almost on the very question
which we were asking our friend before we came hither, and he excused himself
to us, as he does now to you; although he admitted that the matter had been
fully discussed, and that he remembered the answer.

SOCRATES: Then do not, Stranger, deny us the first favour which we ask of you:
I am sure that you will not, and therefore I shall only beg of you to say
whether you like and are accustomed to make a long oration on a subject which
you want to explain to another, or to proceed by the method of question and
answer. I remember hearing a very noble discussion in which Parmenides
employed the latter of the two methods, when I was a young man, and he was far
advanced in years. 

STRANGER: I prefer to talk with another when he responds pleasantly, and is
light in hand; if not, I would rather have my own say.

SOCRATES: Any one of the present company will respond kindly to you, and you
can choose whom you like of them; I should recommend you to take a young
person--Theaetetus, for example--unless you have a preference for some one
else.

STRANGER: I feel ashamed, Socrates, being a new-comer into your society,
instead of talking a little and hearing others talk, to be spinning out a long
soliloquy or address, as if I wanted to show off. For the true answer will
certainly be a very long one, a great deal longer than might be expected from
such a short and simple question. At the same time, I fear that I may seem
rude and ungracious if I refuse your courteous request, especially after what
you have said. For I certainly cannot object to your proposal, that Theaetetus
should respond, having already conversed with him myself, and being
recommended by you to take him.

THEAETETUS: But are you sure, Stranger, that this will be quite so acceptable
to the rest of the company as Socrates imagines?

STRANGER: You hear them applauding, Theaetetus; after that, there is nothing
more to be said. Well then, I am to argue with you, and if you tire of the
argument, you may complain of your friends and not of me.

THEAETETUS: I do not think that I shall tire, and if I do, I shall get my
friend here, young Socrates, the namesake of the elder Socrates, to help; he
is about my own age, and my partner at the gymnasium, and is constantly
accustomed to work with me.

STRANGER: Very good; you can decide about that for yourself as we proceed.
Meanwhile you and I will begin together and enquire into the nature of the
Sophist, first of the three: I should like you to make out what he is and
bring him to light in a discussion; for at present we are only agreed about
the name, but of the thing to which we both apply the name possibly you have
one notion and I another; whereas we ought always to come to an understanding
about the thing itself in terms of a definition, and not merely about the name
minus the definition. Now the tribe of Sophists which we are investigating is
not easily caught or defined; and the world has long ago agreed, that if great
subjects are to be adequately treated, they must be studied in the lesser and
easier instances of them before we proceed to the greatest of all. And as I
know that the tribe of Sophists is troublesome and hard to be caught, I should
recommend that we practise beforehand the method which is to be applied to him
on some simple and smaller thing, unless you can suggest a better way.

THEAETETUS: Indeed I cannot.

STRANGER: Then suppose that we work out some lesser example which will be a
pattern of the greater?

THEAETETUS: Good.

STRANGER: What is there which is well known and not great, and is yet as
susceptible of definition as any larger thing? Shall I say an angler? He is
familiar to all of us, and not a very interesting or important person.

THEAETETUS: He is not.

STRANGER: Yet I suspect that he will furnish us with the sort of definition
and line of enquiry which we want.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: Let us begin by asking whether he is a man having art or not having
art, but some other power.

THEAETETUS: He is clearly a man of art.

STRANGER: And of arts there are two kinds?

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: There is agriculture, and the tending of mortal creatures, and the
art of constructing or moulding vessels, and there is the art of imitation--
all these may be appropriately called by a single name.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean? And what is the name?

STRANGER: He who brings into existence something that did not exist before is
said to be a producer, and that which is brought into existence is said to be
produced.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And all the arts which were just now mentioned are characterized by
this power of producing?

THEAETETUS: They are.

STRANGER: Then let us sum them up under the name of productive or creative
art.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: Next follows the whole class of learning and cognition; then comes
trade, fighting, hunting. And since none of these produces anything, but is
only engaged in conquering by word or deed, or in preventing others from
conquering, things which exist and have been already produced--in each and all
of these branches there appears to be an art which may be called acquisitive.

THEAETETUS: Yes, that is the proper name.

STRANGER: Seeing, then, that all arts are either acquisitive or creative, in
which class shall we place the art of the angler?

THEAETETUS: Clearly in the acquisitive class.

STRANGER: And the acquisitive may be subdivided into two parts: there is
exchange, which is voluntary and is effected by gifts, hire, purchase; and the
other part of acquisitive, which takes by force of word or deed, may be termed
conquest?

THEAETETUS: That is implied in what has been said.

STRANGER: And may not conquest be again subdivided?

THEAETETUS: How?

STRANGER: Open force may be called fighting, and secret force may have the
general name of hunting?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And there is no reason why the art of hunting should not be further
divided.

THEAETETUS: How would you make the division?

STRANGER: Into the hunting of living and of lifeless prey.

THEAETETUS: Yes, if both kinds exist.

STRANGER: Of course they exist; but the hunting after lifeless things having
no special name, except some sorts of diving, and other small matters, may be
omitted; the hunting after living things may be called animal hunting.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And animal hunting may be truly said to have two divisions, land-
animal hunting, which has many kinds and names, and water-animal hunting, or
the hunting after animals who swim?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And of swimming animals, one class lives on the wing and the other
in the water?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: Fowling is the general term under which the hunting of all birds is
included.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: The hunting of animals who live in the water has the general name of
fishing.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And this sort of hunting may be further divided also into two
principal kinds?

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: There is one kind which takes them in nets, another which takes them
by a blow.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean, and how do you distinguish them?

STRANGER: As to the first kind--all that surrounds and encloses anything to
prevent egress, may be rightly called an enclosure.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: For which reason twig baskets, casting-nets, nooses, creels, and the
like may all be termed 'enclosures'?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And therefore this first kind of capture may be called by us capture
with enclosures, or something of that sort?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: The other kind, which is practised by a blow with hooks and three-
pronged spears, when summed up under one name, may be called striking, unless
you, Theaetetus, can find some better name?

THEAETETUS: Never mind the name--what you suggest will do very well.

STRANGER: There is one mode of striking, which is done at night, and by the
light of a fire, and is by the hunters themselves called firing, or spearing
by firelight.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And the fishing by day is called by the general name of barbing,
because the spears, too, are barbed at the point.

THEAETETUS: Yes, that is the term.

STRANGER: Of this barb-fishing, that which strikes the fish who is below from
above is called spearing, because this is the way in which the three-pronged
spears are mostly used.

THEAETETUS: Yes, it is often called so.

STRANGER: Then now there is only one kind remaining.

THEAETETUS: What is that?

STRANGER: When a hook is used, and the fish is not struck in any chance part
of his body, as he is with the spear, but only about the head and mouth, and
is then drawn out from below upwards with reeds and rods:--What is the right
name of that mode of fishing, Theaetetus?

THEAETETUS: I suspect that we have now discovered the object of our search.

STRANGER: Then now you and I have come to an understanding not only about the
name of the angler's art, but about the definition of the thing itself. One
half of all art was acquisitive--half of the acquisitive art was conquest or
taking by force, half of this was hunting, and half of hunting was hunting
animals, half of this was hunting water animals--of this again, the under half
was fishing, half of fishing was striking; a part of striking was fishing with
a barb, and one half of this again, being the kind which strikes with a hook
and draws the fish from below upwards, is the art which we have been seeking,
and which from the nature of the operation is denoted angling or drawing up
.

THEAETETUS: The result has been quite satisfactorily brought out.

STRANGER: And now, following this pattern, let us endeavour to find out what a
Sophist is.

THEAETETUS: By all means.

STRANGER: The first question about the angler was, whether he was a skilled
artist or unskilled?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And shall we call our new friend unskilled, or a thorough master of
his craft?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not unskilled, for his name, as, indeed, you imply, must
surely express his nature.

STRANGER: Then he must be supposed to have some art.

THEAETETUS: What art?

STRANGER: By heaven, they are cousins! it never occurred to us.

THEAETETUS: Who are cousins?

STRANGER: The angler and the Sophist.

THEAETETUS: In what way are they related?

STRANGER: They both appear to me to be hunters.

THEAETETUS: How the Sophist? Of the other we have spoken.

STRANGER: You remember our division of hunting, into hunting after swimming
animals and land animals?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And you remember that we subdivided the swimming and left the land
animals, saying that there were many kinds of them?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: Thus far, then, the Sophist and the angler, starting from the art of
acquiring, take the same road?

THEAETETUS: So it would appear.

STRANGER: Their paths diverge when they reach the art of animal hunting; the
one going to the sea-shore, and to the rivers and to the lakes, and angling
for the animals which are in them.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: While the other goes to land and water of another sort--rivers of
wealth and broad meadow-lands of generous youth; and he also is intending to
take the animals which are in them.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: Of hunting on land there are two principal divisions.

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: One is the hunting of tame, and the other of wild animals.

THEAETETUS: But are tame animals ever hunted?

STRANGER: Yes, if you include man under tame animals. But if you like you may
say that there are no tame animals, or that, if there are, man is not among
them; or you may say that man is a tame animal but is not hunted--you shall
decide which of these alternatives you prefer.

THEAETETUS: I should say, Stranger, that man is a tame animal, and I admit
that he is hunted.

STRANGER: Then let us divide the hunting of tame animals into two parts.

THEAETETUS: How shall we make the division?

STRANGER: Let us define piracy, man-stealing, tyranny, the whole military art,
by one name, as hunting with violence.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: But the art of the lawyer, of the popular orator, and the art of
conversation may be called in one word the art of persuasion.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And of persuasion, there may be said to be two kinds?

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: One is private, and the other public.

THEAETETUS: Yes; each of them forms a class.

STRANGER: And of private hunting, one sort receives hire, and the other brings
gifts.

THEAETETUS: I do not understand you.

STRANGER: You seem never to have observed the manner in which lovers hunt.

THEAETETUS: To what do you refer?

STRANGER: I mean that they lavish gifts on those whom they hunt in addition to
other inducements.

THEAETETUS: Most true.

STRANGER: Let us admit this, then, to be the amatory art.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: But that sort of hireling whose conversation is pleasing and who
baits his hook only with pleasure and exacts nothing but his maintenance in
return, we should all, if I am not mistaken, describe as possessing flattery
or an art of making things pleasant.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And that sort, which professes to form acquaintances only for the
sake of virtue, and demands a reward in the shape of money, may be fairly
called by another name?

THEAETETUS: To be sure.

STRANGER: And what is the name? Will you tell me?

THEAETETUS: It is obvious enough; for I believe that we have discovered the
Sophist: which is, as I conceive, the proper name for the class described.

STRANGER: Then now, Theaetetus, his art may be traced as a branch of the
appropriative, acquisitive family--which hunts animals,--living--land-- tame
animals; which hunts man,--privately--for hire,--taking money in exchange--
having the semblance of education; and this is termed Sophistry, and is a hunt
after young men of wealth and rank--such is the conclusion.

THEAETETUS: Just so.

STRANGER: Let us take another branch of his genealogy; for he is a professor
of a great and many-sided art; and if we look back at what has preceded we see
that he presents another aspect, besides that of which we are speaking.

THEAETETUS: In what respect?

STRANGER: There were two sorts of acquisitive art; the one concerned with
hunting, the other with exchange.

THEAETETUS: There were.

STRANGER: And of the art of exchange there are two divisions, the one of
giving, and the other of selling.

THEAETETUS: Let us assume that.

STRANGER: Next, we will suppose the art of selling to be divided into two
parts.

THEAETETUS: How?

STRANGER: There is one part which is distinguished as the sale of a man's own
productions; another, which is the exchange of the works of others.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And is not that part of exchange which takes place in the city,
being about half of the whole, termed retailing?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And that which exchanges the goods of one city for those of another
by selling and buying is the exchange of the merchant?

THEAETETUS: To be sure.

STRANGER: And you are aware that this exchange of the merchant is of two
kinds: it is partly concerned with food for the use of the body, and partly
with the food of the soul which is bartered and received in exchange for
money.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: You want to know what is the meaning of food for the soul; the other
kind you surely understand.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Take music in general and painting and marionette playing and many
other things, which are purchased in one city, and carried away and sold in
another--wares of the soul which are hawked about either for the sake of
instruction or amusement;--may not he who takes them about and sells them be
quite as truly called a merchant as he who sells meats and drinks?

THEAETETUS: To be sure he may.

STRANGER: And would you not call by the same name him who buys up knowledge
and goes about from city to city exchanging his wares for money?

THEAETETUS: Certainly I should.

STRANGER: Of this merchandise of the soul, may not one part be fairly termed
the art of display? And there is another part which is certainly not less
ridiculous, but being a trade in learning must be called by some name germane
to the matter?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: The latter should have two names,--one descriptive of the sale of
the knowledge of virtue, and the other of the sale of other kinds of
knowledge.

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: The name of art-seller corresponds well enough to the latter; but
you must try and tell me the name of the other.

THEAETETUS: He must be the Sophist, whom we are seeking; no other name can
possibly be right.

STRANGER: No other; and so this trader in virtue again turns out to be our
friend the Sophist, whose art may now be traced from the art of acquisition
through exchange, trade, merchandise, to a merchandise of the soul which is
concerned with speech and the knowledge of virtue.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: And there may be a third reappearance of him;--for he may have
settled down in a city, and may fabricate as well as buy these same wares,
intending to live by selling them, and he would still be called a Sophist?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: Then that part of the acquisitive art which exchanges, and of
exchange which either sells a man's own productions or retails those of
others, as the case may be, and in either way sells the knowledge of virtue,
you would again term Sophistry?

THEAETETUS: I must, if I am to keep pace with the argument.

STRANGER: Let us consider once more whether there may not be yet another
aspect of sophistry.

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: In the acquisitive there was a subdivision of the combative or
fighting art.

THEAETETUS: There was.

STRANGER: Perhaps we had better divide it.

THEAETETUS: What shall be the divisions?

STRANGER: There shall be one division of the competitive, and another of the
pugnacious.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: That part of the pugnacious which is a contest of bodily strength
may be properly called by some such name as violent.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And when the war is one of words, it may be termed controversy?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And controversy may be of two kinds.

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: When long speeches are answered by long speeches, and there is
public discussion about the just and unjust, that is forensic controversy.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And there is a private sort of controversy, which is cut up into
questions and answers, and this is commonly called disputation?

THEAETETUS: Yes, that is the name.

STRANGER: And of disputation, that sort which is only a discussion about
contracts, and is carried on at random, and without rules of art, is
recognized by the reasoning faculty to be a distinct class, but has hitherto
had no distinctive name, and does not deserve to receive one from us.

THEAETETUS: No; for the different sorts of it are too minute and
heterogeneous.

STRANGER: But that which proceeds by rules of art to dispute about justice and
injustice in their own nature, and about things in general, we have been
accustomed to call argumentation ?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And of argumentation, one sort wastes money, and the other makes
money.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: Suppose we try and give to each of these two classes a name.

THEAETETUS: Let us do so.

STRANGER: I should say that the habit which leads a man to neglect his own
affairs for the pleasure of conversation, of which the style is far from being
agreeable to the majority of his hearers, may be fairly termed loquacity: such
is my opinion.

THEAETETUS: That is the common name for it.

STRANGER: But now who the other is, who makes money out of private
disputation, it is your turn to say.

THEAETETUS: There is only one true answer: he is the wonderful Sophist, of
whom we are in pursuit, and who reappears again for the fourth time.

STRANGER: Yes, and with a fresh pedigree, for he is the money-making species
of the Eristic, disputatious, controversial, pugnacious, combative,
acquisitive family, as the argument has already proven.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: How true was the observation that he was a many-sided animal, and
not to be caught with one hand, as they say!

THEAETETUS: Then you must catch him with two.

STRANGER: Yes, we must, if we can. And therefore let us try another track in
our pursuit of him: You are aware that there are certain menial occupations
which have names among servants?

THEAETETUS: Yes, there are many such; which of them do you mean?

STRANGER: I mean such as sifting, straining, winnowing, threshing.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And besides these there are a great many more, such as carding,
spinning, adjusting the warp and the woof; and thousands of similar
expressions are used in the arts.

THEAETETUS: Of what are they to be patterns, and what are we going to do with
them all?

STRANGER: I think that in all of these there is implied a notion of division.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Then if, as I was saying, there is one art which includes all of
them, ought not that art to have one name?

THEAETETUS: And what is the name of the art?

STRANGER: The art of discerning or discriminating.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: Think whether you cannot divide this.

THEAETETUS: I should have to think a long while.

STRANGER: In all the previously named processes either like has been separated
from like or the better from the worse.

THEAETETUS: I see now what you mean.

STRANGER: There is no name for the first kind of separation; of the second,
which throws away the worse and preserves the better, I do know a name.

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: Every discernment or discrimination of that kind, as I have
observed, is called a purification.

THEAETETUS: Yes, that is the usual expression.

STRANGER: And any one may see that purification is of two kinds.

THEAETETUS: Perhaps so, if he were allowed time to think; but I do not see at
this moment.

STRANGER: There are many purifications of bodies which may with propriety be
comprehended under a single name.

THEAETETUS: What are they, and what is their name?

STRANGER: There is the purification of living bodies in their inward and in
their outward parts, of which the former is duly effected by medicine and
gymnastic, the latter by the not very dignified art of the bath-man; and there
is the purification of inanimate substances--to this the arts of fulling and
of furbishing in general attend in a number of minute particulars, having a
variety of names which are thought ridiculous.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: There can be no doubt that they are thought ridiculous, Theaetetus;
but then the dialectical art never considers whether the benefit to be derived
from the purge is greater or less than that to be derived from the sponge, and
has not more interest in the one than in the other; her endeavour is to know
what is and is not kindred in all arts, with a view to the acquisition of
intelligence; and having this in view, she honours them all alike, and when
she makes comparisons, she counts one of them not a whit more ridiculous than
another; nor does she esteem him who adduces as his example of hunting, the
general's art, at all more decorous than another who cites that of the vermin-
destroyer, but only as the greater pretender of the two. And as to your
question concerning the name which was to comprehend all these arts of
purification, whether of animate or inanimate bodies, the art of dialectic is
in no wise particular about fine words, if she may be only allowed to have a
general name for all other purifications, binding them up together and
separating them off from the purification of the soul or intellect. For this
is the purification at which she wants to arrive, and this we should
understand to be her aim.

THEAETETUS: Yes, I understand; and I agree that there are two sorts of
purification, and that one of them is concerned with the soul, and that there
is another which is concerned with the body.

STRANGER: Excellent; and now listen to what I am going to say, and try to
divide further the first of the two.

THEAETETUS: Whatever line of division you suggest, I will endeavour to assist
you.

STRANGER: Do we admit that virtue is distinct from vice in the soul?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And purification was to leave the good and to cast out whatever is
bad?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Then any taking away of evil from the soul may be properly called
purification?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And in the soul there are two kinds of evil.

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: The one may be compared to disease in the body, the other to
deformity.

THEAETETUS: I do not understand.

STRANGER: Perhaps you have never reflected that disease and discord are the
same.

THEAETETUS: To this, again, I know not what I should reply.

STRANGER: Do you not conceive discord to be a dissolution of kindred elements,
originating in some disagreement?

THEAETETUS: Just that.

STRANGER: And is deformity anything but the want of measure, which is always
unsightly?

THEAETETUS: Exactly.

STRANGER: And do we not see that opinion is opposed to desire, pleasure to
anger, reason to pain, and that all these elements are opposed to one another
in the souls of bad men?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And yet they must all be akin?

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: Then we shall be right in calling vice a discord and disease of the
soul?

THEAETETUS: Most true.

STRANGER: And when things having motion, and aiming at an appointed mark,
continually miss their aim and glance aside, shall we say that this is the
effect of symmetry among them, or of the want of symmetry?

THEAETETUS: Clearly of the want of symmetry.

STRANGER: But surely we know that no soul is voluntarily ignorant of anything?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not.

STRANGER: And what is ignorance but the aberration of a mind which is bent on
truth, and in which the process of understanding is perverted?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Then we are to regard an unintelligent soul as deformed and devoid
of symmetry?

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: Then there are these two kinds of evil in the soul--the one which is
generally called vice, and is obviously a disease of the soul...

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And there is the other, which they call ignorance, and which,
because existing only in the soul, they will not allow to be vice.

THEAETETUS: I certainly admit what I at first disputed--that there are two
kinds of vice in the soul, and that we ought to consider cowardice,
intemperance, and injustice to be alike forms of disease in the soul, and
ignorance, of which there are all sorts of varieties, to be deformity.

STRANGER: And in the case of the body are there not two arts which have to do
with the two bodily states?

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: There is gymnastic, which has to do with deformity, and medicine,
which has to do with disease.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And where there is insolence and injustice and cowardice, is not
chastisement the art which is most required?

THEAETETUS: That certainly appears to be the opinion of mankind.

STRANGER: Again, of the various kinds of ignorance, may not instruction be
rightly said to be the remedy?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And of the art of instruction, shall we say that there is one or
many kinds? At any rate there are two principal ones. Think.

THEAETETUS: I will.

STRANGER: I believe that I can see how we shall soonest arrive at the answer
to this question.

THEAETETUS: How?

STRANGER: If we can discover a line which divides ignorance into two halves.
For a division of ignorance into two parts will certainly imply that the art
of instruction is also twofold, answering to the two divisions of ignorance.

THEAETETUS: Well, and do you see what you are looking for?

STRANGER: I do seem to myself to see one very large and bad sort of ignorance
which is quite separate, and may be weighed in the scale against all other
sorts of ignorance put together.

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: When a person supposes that he knows, and does not know; this
appears to be the great source of all the errors of the intellect.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And this, if I am not mistaken, is the kind of ignorance which
specially earns the title of stupidity.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: What name, then, shall be given to the sort of instruction which
gets rid of this?

THEAETETUS: The instruction which you mean, Stranger, is, I should imagine,
not the teaching of handicraft arts, but what, thanks to us, has been termed
education in this part the world.

STRANGER: Yes, Theaetetus, and by nearly all Hellenes. But we have still to
consider whether education admits of any further division.

THEAETETUS: We have.

STRANGER: I think that there is a point at which such a division is possible.

THEAETETUS: Where?

STRANGER: Of education, one method appears to be rougher, and another
smoother.

THEAETETUS: How are we to distinguish the two?

STRANGER: There is the time-honoured mode which our fathers commonly practised
towards their sons, and which is still adopted by many--either of roughly
reproving their errors, or of gently advising them; which varieties may be
correctly included under the general term of admonition.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: But whereas some appear to have arrived at the conclusion that all
ignorance is involuntary, and that no one who thinks himself wise is willing
to learn any of those things in which he is conscious of his own cleverness,
and that the admonitory sort of instruction gives much trouble and does little
good--

THEAETETUS: There they are quite right.

STRANGER: Accordingly, they set to work to eradicate the spirit of conceit in
another way.

THEAETETUS: In what way?

STRANGER: They cross-examine a man's words, when he thinks that he is saying
something and is really saying nothing, and easily convict him of
inconsistencies in his opinions; these they then collect by the dialectical
process, and placing them side by side, show that they contradict one another
about the same things, in relation to the same things, and in the same
respect. He, seeing this, is angry with himself, and grows gentle towards
others, and thus is entirely delivered from great prejudices and harsh
notions, in a way which is most amusing to the hearer, and produces the most
lasting good effect on the person who is the subject of the operation. For as
the physician considers that the body will receive no benefit from taking food
until the internal obstacles have been removed, so the purifier of the soul is
conscious that his patient will receive no benefit from the application of
knowledge until he is refuted, and from refutation learns modesty; he must be
purged of his prejudices first and made to think that he knows only what he
knows, and no more.

THEAETETUS: That is certainly the best and wisest state of mind.

STRANGER: For all these reasons, Theaetetus, we must admit that refutation is
the greatest and chiefest of purifications, and he who has not been refuted,
though he be the Great King himself, is in an awful state of impurity; he is
uninstructed and deformed in those things in which he who would be truly
blessed ought to be fairest and purest.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: And who are the ministers of this art? I am afraid to say the
Sophists.

THEAETETUS: Why?

STRANGER: Lest we should assign to them too high a prerogative.

THEAETETUS: Yet the Sophist has a certain likeness to our minister of
purification.

STRANGER: Yes, the same sort of likeness which a wolf, who is the fiercest of
animals, has to a dog, who is the gentlest. But he who would not be found
tripping, ought to be very careful in this matter of comparisons, for they are
most slippery things. Nevertheless, let us assume that the Sophists are the
men. I say this provisionally, for I think that the line which divides them
will be marked enough if proper care is taken.

THEAETETUS: Likely enough.

STRANGER: Let us grant, then, that from the discerning art comes purification,
and from purification let there be separated off a part which is concerned
with the soul; of this mental purification instruction is a portion, and of
instruction education, and of education, that refutation of vain conceit which
has been discovered in the present argument; and let this be called by you and
me the nobly-descended art of Sophistry.

THEAETETUS: Very well; and yet, considering the number of forms in which he
has presented himself, I begin to doubt how I can with any truth or confidence
describe the real nature of the Sophist.

STRANGER: You naturally feel perplexed; and yet I think that he must be still
more perplexed in his attempt to escape us, for as the proverb says, when
every way is blocked, there is no escape; now, then, is the time of all others
to set upon him.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: First let us wait a moment and recover breath, and while we are
resting, we may reckon up in how many forms he has appeared. In the first
place, he was discovered to be a paid hunter after wealth and youth.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: In the second place, he was a merchant in the goods of the soul.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: In the third place, he has turned out to be a retailer of the same
sort of wares.

THEAETETUS: Yes; and in the fourth place, he himself manufactured the learned
wares which he sold.

STRANGER: Quite right; I will try and remember the fifth myself. He belonged
to the fighting class, and was further distinguished as a hero of debate, who
professed the eristic art.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: The sixth point was doubtful, and yet we at last agreed that he was
a purger of souls, who cleared away notions obstructive to knowledge.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: Do you not see that when the professor of any art has one name and
many kinds of knowledge, there must be something wrong? The multiplicity of
names which is applied to him shows that the common principle to which all
these branches of knowledge are tending, is not understood.

THEAETETUS: I should imagine this to be the case.

STRANGER: At any rate we will understand him, and no indolence shall prevent
us. Let us begin again, then, and re-examine some of our statements concerning
the Sophist; there was one thing which appeared to me especially
characteristic of him.

THEAETETUS: To what are you referring?

STRANGER: We were saying of him, if I am not mistaken, that he was a disputer?

THEAETETUS: We were.

STRANGER: And does he not also teach others the art of disputation?

THEAETETUS: Certainly he does.

STRANGER: And about what does he profess that he teaches men to dispute? To
begin at the beginning--Does he make them able to dispute about divine things,
which are invisible to men in general?

THEAETETUS: At any rate, he is said to do so.

STRANGER: And what do you say of the visible things in heaven and earth, and
the like?

THEAETETUS: Certainly he disputes, and teaches to dispute about them.

STRANGER: Then, again, in private conversation, when any universal assertion
is made about generation and essence, we know that such persons are tremendous
argufiers, and are able to impart their own skill to others.

THEAETETUS: Undoubtedly.

STRANGER: And do they not profess to make men able to dispute about law and
about politics in general?

THEAETETUS: Why, no one would have anything to say to them, if they did not
make these professions.

STRANGER: In all and every art, what the craftsman ought to say in answer to
any question is written down in a popular form, and he who likes may learn.

THEAETETUS: I suppose that you are referring to the precepts of Protagoras
about wrestling and the other arts?

STRANGER: Yes, my friend, and about a good many other things. In a word, is
not the art of disputation a power of disputing about all things?

THEAETETUS: Certainly; there does not seem to be much which is left out.

STRANGER: But oh! my dear youth, do you suppose this possible? for perhaps
your young eyes may see things which to our duller sight do not appear.

THEAETETUS: To what are you alluding? I do not think that I understand your
present question.

STRANGER: I ask whether anybody can understand all things.

THEAETETUS: Happy would mankind be if such a thing were possible!

SOCRATES: But how can any one who is ignorant dispute in a rational manner
against him who knows?

THEAETETUS: He cannot.

STRANGER: Then why has the sophistical art such a mysterious power?

THEAETETUS: To what do you refer?

STRANGER: How do the Sophists make young men believe in their supreme and
universal wisdom? For if they neither disputed nor were thought to dispute
rightly, or being thought to do so were deemed no wiser for their
controversial skill, then, to quote your own observation, no one would give
them money or be willing to learn their art.

THEAETETUS: They certainly would not.

STRANGER: But they are willing.

THEAETETUS: Yes, they are.

STRANGER: Yes, and the reason, as I should imagine, is that they are supposed
to have knowledge of those things about which they dispute?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And they dispute about all things?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And therefore, to their disciples, they appear to be all-wise?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: But they are not; for that was shown to be impossible.

THEAETETUS: Impossible, of course.

STRANGER: Then the Sophist has been shown to have a sort of conjectural or
apparent knowledge only of all things, which is not the truth?

THEAETETUS: Exactly; no better description of him could be given.

STRANGER: Let us now take an illustration, which will still more clearly
explain his nature.

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: I will tell you, and you shall answer me, giving your very closest
attention. Suppose that a person were to profess, not that he could speak or
dispute, but that he knew how to make and do all things, by a single art.

THEAETETUS: All things?

STRANGER: I see that you do not understand the first word that I utter, for
you do not understand the meaning of 'all.'

THEAETETUS: No, I do not.

STRANGER: Under all things, I include you and me, and also animals and trees.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: Suppose a person to say that he will make you and me, and all
creatures.

THEAETETUS: What would he mean by 'making'? He cannot be a husbandman;--for
you said that he is a maker of animals.

STRANGER: Yes; and I say that he is also the maker of the sea, and the earth,
and the heavens, and the gods, and of all other things; and, further, that he
can make them in no time, and sell them for a few pence.

THEAETETUS: That must be a jest.

STRANGER: And when a man says that he knows all things, and can teach them to
another at a small cost, and in a short time, is not that a jest?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And is there any more artistic or graceful form of jest than
imitation?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not; and imitation is a very comprehensive term, which
includes under one class the most diverse sorts of things.

STRANGER: We know, of course, that he who professes by one art to make all
things is really a painter, and by the painter's art makes resemblances of
real things which have the same name with them; and he can deceive the less
intelligent sort of young children, to whom he shows his pictures at a
distance, into the belief that he has the absolute power of making whatever he
likes.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And may there not be supposed to be an imitative art of reasoning?
Is it not possible to enchant the hearts of young men by words poured through
their ears, when they are still at a distance from the truth of facts, by
exhibiting to them fictitious arguments, and making them think that they are
true, and that the speaker is the wisest of men in all things?

THEAETETUS: Yes; why should there not be another such art?

STRANGER: But as time goes on, and their hearers advance in years, and come
into closer contact with realities, and have learnt by sad experience to see
and feel the truth of things, are not the greater part of them compelled to
change many opinions which they formerly entertained, so that the great
appears small to them, and the easy difficult, and all their dreamy
speculations are overturned by the facts of life?

THEAETETUS: That is my view, as far as I can judge, although, at my age, I may
be one of those who see things at a distance only.

STRANGER: And the wish of all of us, who are your friends, is and always will
be to bring you as near to the truth as we can without the sad reality. And
now I should like you to tell me, whether the Sophist is not visibly a
magician and imitator of true being; or are we still disposed to think that he
may have a true knowledge of the various matters about which he disputes?

THEAETETUS: But how can he, Stranger? Is there any doubt, after what has been
said, that he is to be located in one of the divisions of children's play?

STRANGER: Then we must place him in the class of magicians and mimics.

THEAETETUS: Certainly we must.

STRANGER: And now our business is not to let the animal out, for we have got
him in a sort of dialectical net, and there is one thing which he decidedly
will not escape.

THEAETETUS: What is that?

STRANGER: The inference that he is a juggler.

THEAETETUS: Precisely my own opinion of him.

STRANGER: Then, clearly, we ought as soon as possible to divide the image-
making art, and go down into the net, and, if the Sophist does not run away
from us, to seize him according to orders and deliver him over to reason, who
is the lord of the hunt, and proclaim the capture of him; and if he creeps
into the recesses of the imitative art, and secretes himself in one of them,
to divide again and follow him up until in some sub-section of imitation he is
caught. For our method of tackling each and all is one which neither he nor
any other creature will ever escape in triumph.

THEAETETUS: Well said; and let us do as you propose.

STRANGER: Well, then, pursuing the same analytic method as before, I think
that I can discern two divisions of the imitative art, but I am not as yet
able to see in which of them the desired form is to be found.

THEAETETUS: Will you tell me first what are the two divisions of which you are
speaking?

STRANGER: One is the art of likeness-making;--generally a likeness of anything
is made by producing a copy which is executed according to the proportions of
the original, similar in length and breadth and depth, each thing receiving
also its appropriate colour.

THEAETETUS: Is not this always the aim of imitation?

STRANGER: Not always; in works either of sculpture or of painting, which are
of any magnitude, there is a certain degree of deception; for artists were to
give the true proportions of their fair works, the upper part, which is
farther off, would appear to be out of proportion in comparison with the
lower, which is nearer; and so they give up the truth in their images and make
only the proportions which appear to be beautiful, disregarding the real ones.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: And that which being other is also like, may we not fairly call a
likeness or image?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And may we not, as I did just now, call that part of the imitative
art which is concerned with making such images the art of likeness-making?

THEAETETUS: Let that be the name.

STRANGER: And what shall we call those resemblances of the beautiful, which
appear such owing to the unfavourable position of the spectator, whereas if a
person had the power of getting a correct view of works of such magnitude,
they would appear not even like that to which they profess to be like? May we
not call these 'appearances,' since they appear only and are not really like?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: There is a great deal of this kind of thing in painting, and in all
imitation.

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: And may we not fairly call the sort of art, which produces an
appearance and not an image, phantastic art?

THEAETETUS: Most fairly.

STRANGER: These then are the two kinds of image-making--the art of making
likenesses, and phantastic or the art of making appearances?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: I was doubtful before in which of them I should place the Sophist,
nor am I even now able to see clearly; verily he is a wonderful and
inscrutable creature. And now in the cleverest manner he has got into an
impossible place.

THEAETETUS: Yes, he has.

STRANGER: Do you speak advisedly, or are you carried away at the moment by the
habit of assenting into giving a hasty answer?

THEAETETUS: May I ask to what you are referring?

STRANGER: My dear friend, we are engaged in a very difficult speculation--
there can be no doubt of that; for how a thing can appear and seem, and not
be, or how a man can say a thing which is not true, has always been and still
remains a very perplexing question. Can any one say or think that falsehood
really exists, and avoid being caught in a contradiction? Indeed, Theaetetus,
the task is a difficult one.

THEAETETUS: Why?

STRANGER: He who says that falsehood exists has the audacity to assert the
being of not-being; for this is implied in the possibility of falsehood. But,
my boy, in the days when I was a boy, the great Parmenides protested against
this doctrine, and to the end of his life he continued to inculcate the same
lesson--always repeating both in verse and out of verse:

'Keep your mind from this way of enquiry, for never will you show that not-
being is.'

Such is his testimony, which is confirmed by the very expression when sifted a
little. Would you object to begin with the consideration of the words
themselves?

THEAETETUS: Never mind about me; I am only desirous that you should carry on
the argument in the best way, and that you should take me with you.

STRANGER: Very good; and now say, do we venture to utter the forbidden word
'not-being'?

THEAETETUS: Certainly we do.

STRANGER: Let us be serious then, and consider the question neither in strife
nor play: suppose that one of the hearers of Parmenides was asked, 'To what is
the term "not-being" to be applied?'--do you know what sort of object he would
single out in reply, and what answer he would make to the enquirer?

THEAETETUS: That is a difficult question, and one not to be answered at all by
a person like myself.

STRANGER: There is at any rate no difficulty in seeing that the predicate
'not-being' is not applicable to any being.

THEAETETUS: None, certainly.

STRANGER: And if not to being, then not to something.

THEAETETUS: Of course not.

STRANGER: It is also plain, that in speaking of something we speak of being,
for to speak of an abstract something naked and isolated from all being is
impossible.

THEAETETUS: Impossible.

STRANGER: You mean by assenting to imply that he who says something must say
some one thing?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Some in the singular  you would say is the sign of one, some in
the dual  of two, some in the plural  of many?

THEAETETUS: Exactly.

STRANGER: Then he who says 'not something' must say absolutely nothing.

THEAETETUS: Most assuredly.

STRANGER: And as we cannot admit that a man speaks and says nothing, he who
says 'not-being' does not speak at all.

THEAETETUS: The difficulty of the argument can no further go.

STRANGER: Not yet, my friend, is the time for such a word; for there still
remains of all perplexities the first and greatest, touching the very
foundation of the matter.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean? Do not be afraid to speak.

STRANGER: To that which is, may be attributed some other thing which is?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: But can anything which is, be attributed to that which is not?

THEAETETUS: Impossible.

STRANGER: And all number is to be reckoned among things which are?

THEAETETUS: Yes, surely number, if anything, has a real existence.

STRANGER: Then we must not attempt to attribute to not-being number either in
the singular or plural?

THEAETETUS: The argument implies that we should be wrong in doing so.

STRANGER: But how can a man either express in words or even conceive in
thought things which are not or a thing which is not without number?

THEAETETUS: How indeed?

STRANGER: When we speak of things which are not, are we not attributing
plurality to not-being?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: But, on the other hand, when we say 'what is not,' do we not
attribute unity?

THEAETETUS: Manifestly.

STRANGER: Nevertheless, we maintain that you may not and ought not to
attribute being to not-being?

THEAETETUS: Most true.

STRANGER: Do you see, then, that not-being in itself can neither be spoken,
uttered, or thought, but that it is unthinkable, unutterable, unspeakable,
indescribable?

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: But, if so, I was wrong in telling you just now that the difficulty
which was coming is the greatest of all.

THEAETETUS: What! is there a greater still behind?

STRANGER: Well, I am surprised, after what has been said already, that you do
not see the difficulty in which he who would refute the notion of not-being is
involved. For he is compelled to contradict himself as soon as he makes the
attempt.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean? Speak more clearly.

STRANGER: Do not expect clearness from me. For I, who maintain that not-being
has no part either in the one or many, just now spoke and am still speaking of
not-being as one; for I say 'not-being.' Do you understand?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And a little while ago I said that not-being is unutterable,
unspeakable, indescribable: do you follow?

THEAETETUS: I do after a fashion.

STRANGER: When I introduced the word 'is,' did I not contradict what I said
before?

THEAETETUS: Clearly.

STRANGER: And in using the singular verb, did I not speak of not-being as one?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And when I spoke of not-being as indescribable and unspeakable and
unutterable, in using each of these words in the singular, did I not refer to
not-being as one?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And yet we say that, strictly speaking, it should not be defined as
one or many, and should not even be called 'it,' for the use of the word 'it'
would imply a form of unity.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: How, then, can any one put any faith in me? For now, as always, I am
unequal to the refutation of not-being. And therefore, as I was saying, do not
look to me for the right way of speaking about not-being; but come, let us try
the experiment with you.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: Make a noble effort, as becomes youth, and endeavour with all your
might to speak of not-being in a right manner, without introducing into it
either existence or unity or plurality.

THEAETETUS: It would be a strange boldness in me which would attempt the task
when I see you thus discomfited.

STRANGER: Say no more of ourselves; but until we find some one or other who
can speak of not-being without number, we must acknowledge that the Sophist is
a clever rogue who will not be got out of his hole.

THEAETETUS: Most true.

STRANGER: And if we say to him that he professes an art of making appearances,
he will grapple with us and retort our argument upon ourselves; and when we
call him an image-maker he will say, 'Pray what do you mean at all by an
image?'--and I should like to know, Theaetetus, how we can possibly answer the
younker's question?

THEAETETUS: We shall doubtless tell him of the images which are reflected in
water or in mirrors; also of sculptures, pictures, and other duplicates.

STRANGER: I see, Theaetetus, that you have never made the acquaintance of the
Sophist.

THEAETETUS: Why do you think so?

STRANGER: He will make believe to have his eyes shut, or to have none.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: When you tell him of something existing in a mirror, or in
sculpture, and address him as though he had eyes, he will laugh you to scorn,
and will pretend that he knows nothing of mirrors and streams, or of sight at
all; he will say that he is asking about an idea.

THEAETETUS: What can he mean?

STRANGER: The common notion pervading all these objects, which you speak of as
many, and yet call by the single name of image, as though it were the unity
under which they were all included. How will you maintain your ground against
him?

THEAETETUS: How, Stranger, can I describe an image except as something
fashioned in the likeness of the true?

STRANGER: And do you mean this something to be some other true thing, or what
do you mean?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not another true thing, but only a resemblance.

STRANGER: And you mean by true that which really is?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And the not true is that which is the opposite of the true?

THEAETETUS: Exactly.

STRANGER: A resemblance, then, is not really real, if, as you say, not true?

THEAETETUS: Nay, but it is in a certain sense.

STRANGER: You mean to say, not in a true sense?

THEAETETUS: Yes; it is in reality only an image.

STRANGER: Then what we call an image is in reality really unreal.

THEAETETUS: In what a strange complication of being and not-being we are
involved!

STRANGER: Strange! I should think so. See how, by his reciprocation of
opposites, the many-headed Sophist has compelled us, quite against our will,
to admit the existence of not-being.

THEAETETUS: Yes, indeed, I see.

STRANGER: The difficulty is how to define his art without falling into a
contradiction.

THEAETETUS: How do you mean? And where does the danger lie?

STRANGER: When we say that he deceives us with an illusion, and that his art
is illusory, do we mean that our soul is led by his art to think falsely, or
what do we mean?

THEAETETUS: There is nothing else to be said.

STRANGER: Again, false opinion is that form of opinion which thinks the
opposite of the truth:--You would assent?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: You mean to say that false opinion thinks what is not?

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: Does false opinion think that things which are not are not, or that
in a certain sense they are?

THEAETETUS: Things that are not must be imagined to exist in a certain sense,
if any degree of falsehood is to be possible.

STRANGER: And does not false opinion also think that things which most
certainly exist do not exist at all?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And here, again, is falsehood?

THEAETETUS: Falsehood--yes.

STRANGER: And in like manner, a false proposition will be deemed to be one
which asserts the non-existence of things which are, and the existence of
things which are not.

THEAETETUS: There is no other way in which a false proposition can arise.

STRANGER: There is not; but the Sophist will deny these statements. And indeed
how can any rational man assent to them, when the very expressions which we
have just used were before acknowledged by us to be unutterable, unspeakable,
indescribable, unthinkable? Do you see his point, Theaetetus?

THEAETETUS: Of course he will say that we are contradicting ourselves when we
hazard the assertion, that falsehood exists in opinion and in words; for in
maintaining this, we are compelled over and over again to assert being of not-
being, which we admitted just now to be an utter impossibility.

STRANGER: How well you remember! And now it is high time to hold a
consultation as to what we ought to do about the Sophist; for if we persist in
looking for him in the class of false workers and magicians, you see that the
handles for objection and the difficulties which will arise are very numerous
and obvious.

THEAETETUS: They are indeed.

STRANGER: We have gone through but a very small portion of them, and they are
really infinite.

THEAETETUS: If that is the case, we cannot possibly catch the Sophist.

STRANGER: Shall we then be so faint-hearted as to give him up?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not, I should say, if we can get the slightest hold upon
him.

STRANGER: Will you then forgive me, and, as your words imply, not be
altogether displeased if I flinch a little from the grasp of such a sturdy
argument?

THEAETETUS: To be sure I will.

STRANGER: I have a yet more urgent request to make.

THEAETETUS: Which is--?

STRANGER: That you will promise not to regard me as a parricide.

THEAETETUS: And why?

STRANGER: Because, in self-defence, I must test the philosophy of my father
Parmenides, and try to prove by main force that in a certain sense not-being
is, and that being, on the other hand, is not.

THEAETETUS: Some attempt of the kind is clearly needed.

STRANGER: Yes, a blind man, as they say, might see that, and, unless these
questions are decided in one way or another, no one when he speaks of false
words, or false opinion, or idols, or images, or imitations, or appearances,
or about the arts which are concerned with them; can avoid falling into
ridiculous contradictions.

THEAETETUS: Most true.

STRANGER: And therefore I must venture to lay hands on my father's argument;
for if I am to be over-scrupulous, I shall have to give the matter up.

THEAETETUS: Nothing in the world should ever induce us to do so.

STRANGER: I have a third little request which I wish to make.

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: You heard me say what I have always felt and still feel--that I have
no heart for this argument?

THEAETETUS: I did.

STRANGER: I tremble at the thought of what I have said, and expect that you
will deem me mad, when you hear of my sudden changes and shiftings; let me
therefore observe, that I am examining the question entirely out of regard for
you.

THEAETETUS: There is no reason for you to fear that I shall impute any
impropriety to you, if you attempt this refutation and proof; take heart,
therefore, and proceed.

STRANGER: And where shall I begin the perilous enterprise? I think that the
road which I must take is--

THEAETETUS: Which?--Let me hear.

STRANGER: I think that we had better, first of all, consider the points which
at present are regarded as self-evident, lest we may have fallen into some
confusion, and be too ready to assent to one another, fancying that we are
quite clear about them.

THEAETETUS: Say more distinctly what you mean.

STRANGER: I think that Parmenides, and all ever yet undertook to determine the
number and nature of existences, talked to us in rather a light and easy
strain.

THEAETETUS: How?

STRANGER: As if we had been children, to whom they repeated each his own
mythus or story;--one said that there were three principles, and that at one
time there was war between certain of them; and then again there was peace,
and they were married and begat children, and brought them up; and another
spoke of two principles,--a moist and a dry, or a hot and a cold, and made
them marry and cohabit. The Eleatics, however, in our part of the world, say
that all things are many in name, but in nature one; this is their mythus,
which goes back to Xenophanes, and is even older. Then there are Ionian, and
in more recent times Sicilian muses, who have arrived at the conclusion that
to unite the two principles is safer, and to say that being is one and many,
and that these are held together by enmity and friendship, ever parting, ever
meeting, as the severer Muses assert, while the gentler ones do not insist on
the perpetual strife and peace, but admit a relaxation and alternation of
them; peace and unity sometimes prevailing under the sway of Aphrodite, and
then again plurality and war, by reason of a principle of strife. Whether any
of them spoke the truth in all this is hard to determine; besides, antiquity
and famous men should have reverence, and not be liable to accusations so
serious. Yet one thing may be said of them without offence--

THEAETETUS: What thing?

STRANGER: That they went on their several ways disdaining to notice people
like ourselves; they did not care whether they took us with them, or left us
behind them.

THEAETETUS: How do you mean?

STRANGER: I mean to say, that when they talk of one, two, or more elements,
which are or have become or are becoming, or again of heat mingling with cold,
assuming in some other part of their works separations and mixtures,--tell me,
Theaetetus, do you understand what they mean by these expressions? When I was
a younger man, I used to fancy that I understood quite well what was meant by
the term 'not-being,' which is our present subject of dispute; and now you see
in what a fix we are about it.

THEAETETUS: I see.

STRANGER: And very likely we have been getting into the same perplexity about
'being,' and yet may fancy that when anybody utters the word, we understand
him quite easily, although we do not know about not-being. But we may be;
equally ignorant of both.

THEAETETUS: I dare say.

STRANGER: And the same may be said of all the terms just mentioned.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: The consideration of most of them may be deferred; but we had better
now discuss the chief captain and leader of them.

THEAETETUS: Of what are you speaking? You clearly think that we must first
investigate what people mean by the word 'being.'

STRANGER: You follow close at my heels, Theaetetus. For the right method, I
conceive, will be to call into our presence the dualistic philosophers and to
interrogate them. 'Come,' we will say, 'Ye, who affirm that hot and cold or
any other two principles are the universe, what is this term which you apply
to both of them, and what do you mean when you say that both and each of them
"are"? How are we to understand the word "are"? Upon your view, are we to
suppose that there is a third principle over and above the other two,--three
in all, and not two? For clearly you cannot say that one of the two principles
is being, and yet attribute being equally to both of them; for, if you did,
whichever of the two is identified with being, will comprehend the other; and
so they will be one and not two.'

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: But perhaps you mean to give the name of 'being' to both of them
together?

THEAETETUS: Quite likely.

STRANGER: 'Then, friends,' we shall reply to them, 'the answer is plainly that
the two will still be resolved into one.'

THEAETETUS: Most true.

STRANGER: 'Since, then, we are in a difficulty, please to tell us what you
mean, when you speak of being; for there can be no doubt that you always from
the first understood your own meaning, whereas we once thought that we
understood you, but now we are in a great strait. Please to begin by
explaining this matter to us, and let us no longer fancy that we understand
you, when we entirely misunderstand you.' There will be no impropriety in our
demanding an answer to this question, either of the dualists or of the
pluralists?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not.

STRANGER: And what about the assertors of the oneness of the all--must we not
endeavour to ascertain from them what they mean by 'being'?

THEAETETUS: By all means.

STRANGER: Then let them answer this question: One, you say, alone is? 'Yes,'
they will reply.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And there is something which you call 'being'?

THEAETETUS: 'Yes.'

STRANGER: And is being the same as one, and do you apply two names to the same
thing?

THEAETETUS: What will be their answer, Stranger?

STRANGER: It is clear, Theaetetus, that he who asserts the unity of being will
find a difficulty in answering this or any other question.

THEAETETUS: Why so?

STRANGER: To admit of two names, and to affirm that there is nothing but
unity, is surely ridiculous?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And equally irrational to admit that a name is anything?

THEAETETUS: How so?

STRANGER: To distinguish the name from the thing, implies duality.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And yet he who identifies the name with the thing will be compelled
to say that it is the name of nothing, or if he says that it is the name of
something, even then the name will only be the name of a name, and of nothing
else.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And the one will turn out to be only one of one, and being absolute
unity, will represent a mere name.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And would they say that the whole is other than the one that is, or
the same with it?

THEAETETUS: To be sure they would, and they actually say so.

STRANGER: If being is a whole, as Parmenides sings,--

'Every way like unto the fullness of a well-rounded sphere, Evenly balanced
from the centre on every side, And must needs be neither greater nor less in
any way, Neither on this side nor on that--'

then being has a centre and extremes, and, having these, must also have parts.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Yet that which has parts may have the attribute of unity in all the
parts, and in this way being all and a whole, may be one?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: But that of which this is the condition cannot be absolute unity?

THEAETETUS: Why not?

STRANGER: Because, according to right reason, that which is truly one must be
affirmed to be absolutely indivisible.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: But this indivisible, if made up of many parts, will contradict
reason.

THEAETETUS: I understand.

STRANGER: Shall we say that being is one and a whole, because it has the
attribute of unity? Or shall we say that being is not a whole at all?

THEAETETUS: That is a hard alternative to offer.

STRANGER: Most true; for being, having in a certain sense the attribute of
one, is yet proved not to be the same as one, and the all is therefore more
than one.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And yet if being be not a whole, through having the attribute of
unity, and there be such a thing as an absolute whole, being lacks something
of its own nature?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: Upon this view, again, being, having a defect of being, will become
not-being?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And, again, the all becomes more than one, for being and the whole
will each have their separate nature.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: But if the whole does not exist at all, all the previous
difficulties remain the same, and there will be the further difficulty, that
besides having no being, being can never have come into being.

THEAETETUS: Why so?

STRANGER: Because that which comes into being always comes into being as a
whole, so that he who does not give whole a place among beings, cannot speak
either of essence or generation as existing.

THEAETETUS: Yes, that certainly appears to be true.

STRANGER: Again; how can that which is not a whole have any quantity? For that
which is of a certain quantity must necessarily be the whole of that quantity.

THEAETETUS: Exactly.

STRANGER: And there will be innumerable other points, each of them causing
infinite trouble to him who says that being is either one or two.

THEAETETUS: The difficulties which are dawning upon us prove this; for one
objection connects with another, and they are always involving what has
preceded in a greater and worse perplexity.

STRANGER: We are far from having exhausted the more exact thinkers who treat
of being and not-being. But let us be content to leave them, and proceed to
view those who speak less precisely; and we shall find as the result of all,
that the nature of being is quite as difficult to comprehend as that of not-
being.

THEAETETUS: Then now we will go to the others.

STRANGER: There appears to be a sort of war of Giants and Gods going on
amongst them; they are fighting with one another about the nature of essence.

THEAETETUS: How is that?

STRANGER: Some of them are dragging down all things from heaven and from the
unseen to earth, and they literally grasp in their hands rocks and oaks; of
these they lay hold, and obstinately maintain, that the things only which can
be touched or handled have being or essence, because they define being and
body as one, and if any one else says that what is not a body exists they
altogether despise him, and will hear of nothing but body.

THEAETETUS: I have often met with such men, and terrible fellows they are.

STRANGER: And that is the reason why their opponents cautiously defend
themselves from above, out of an unseen world, mightily contending that true
essence consists of certain intelligible and incorporeal ideas; the bodies of
the materialists, which by them are maintained to be the very truth, they
break up into little bits by their arguments, and affirm them to be, not
essence, but generation and motion. Between the two armies, Theaetetus, there
is always an endless conflict raging concerning these matters.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Let us ask each party in turn, to give an account of that which they
call essence.

THEAETETUS: How shall we get it out of them?

STRANGER: With those who make being to consist in ideas, there will be less
difficulty, for they are civil people enough; but there will be very great
difficulty, or rather an absolute impossibility, in getting an opinion out of
those who drag everything down to matter. Shall I tell you what we must do?

THEAETETUS: What?

STRANGER: Let us, if we can, really improve them; but if this is not possible,
let us imagine them to be better than they are, and more willing to answer in
accordance with the rules of argument, and then their opinion will be more
worth having; for that which better men acknowledge has more weight than that
which is acknowledged by inferior men. Moreover we are no respecters of
persons, but seekers after truth.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: Then now, on the supposition that they are improved, let us ask them
to state their views, and do you interpret them.

THEAETETUS: Agreed.

STRANGER: Let them say whether they would admit that there is such a thing as
a mortal animal.

THEAETETUS: Of course they would.

STRANGER: And do they not acknowledge this to be a body having a soul?

THEAETETUS: Certainly they do.

STRANGER: Meaning to say that the soul is something which exists?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And do they not say that one soul is just, and another unjust, and
that one soul is wise, and another foolish?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And that the just and wise soul becomes just and wise by the
possession of justice and wisdom, and the opposite under opposite
circumstances?

THEAETETUS: Yes, they do.

STRANGER: But surely that which may be present or may be absent will be
admitted by them to exist?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And, allowing that justice, wisdom, the other virtues, and their
opposites exist, as well as a soul in which they inhere, do they affirm any of
them to be visible and tangible, or are they all invisible?

THEAETETUS: They would say that hardly any of them are visible.

STRANGER: And would they say that they are corporeal?

THEAETETUS: They would distinguish: the soul would be said by them to have a
body; but as to the other qualities of justice, wisdom, and the like, about
which you asked, they would not venture either to deny their existence, or to
maintain that they were all corporeal.

STRANGER: Verily, Theaetetus, I perceive a great improvement in them; the real
aborigines, children of the dragon's teeth, would have been deterred by no
shame at all, but would have obstinately asserted that nothing is which they
are not able to squeeze in their hands.

THEAETETUS: That is pretty much their notion.

STRANGER: Let us push the question; for if they will admit that any, even the
smallest particle of being, is incorporeal, it is enough; they must then say
what that nature is which is common to both the corporeal and incorporeal, and
which they have in their mind's eye when they say of both of them that they
'are.' Perhaps they may be in a difficulty; and if this is the case, there is
a possibility that they may accept a notion of ours respecting the nature of
being, having nothing of their own to offer.

THEAETETUS: What is the notion? Tell me, and we shall soon see.

STRANGER: My notion would be, that anything which possesses any sort of power
to affect another, or to be affected by another, if only for a single moment,
however trifling the cause and however slight the effect, has real existence;
and I hold that the definition of being is simply power.

THEAETETUS: They accept your suggestion, having nothing better of their own to
offer.

STRANGER: Very good; perhaps we, as well as they, may one day change our
minds; but, for the present, this may be regarded as the understanding which
is established with them.

THEAETETUS: Agreed.

STRANGER: Let us now go to the friends of ideas; of their opinions, too, you
shall be the interpreter.

THEAETETUS: I will.

STRANGER: To them we say--You would distinguish essence from generation?

THEAETETUS: 'Yes,' they reply.

STRANGER: And you would allow that we participate in generation with the body,
and through perception, but we participate with the soul through thought in
true essence; and essence you would affirm to be always the same and
immutable, whereas generation or becoming varies?

THEAETETUS: Yes; that is what we should affirm.

STRANGER: Well, fair sirs, we say to them, what is this participation, which
you assert of both? Do you agree with our recent definition?

THEAETETUS: What definition?

STRANGER: We said that being was an active or passive energy, arising out of a
certain power which proceeds from elements meeting with one another. Perhaps
your ears, Theaetetus, may fail to catch their answer, which I recognize
because I have been accustomed to hear it.

THEAETETUS: And what is their answer?

STRANGER: They deny the truth of what we were just now saying to the
aborigines about existence.

THEAETETUS: What was that?

STRANGER: Any power of doing or suffering in a degree however slight was held
by us to be a sufficient definition of being?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: They deny this, and say that the power of doing or suffering is
confined to becoming, and that neither power is applicable to being.

THEAETETUS: And is there not some truth in what they say?

STRANGER: Yes; but our reply will be, that we want to ascertain from them more
distinctly, whether they further admit that the soul knows, and that being or
essence is known.

THEAETETUS: There can be no doubt that they say so.

STRANGER: And is knowing and being known doing or suffering, or both, or is
the one doing and the other suffering, or has neither any share in either?

THEAETETUS: Clearly, neither has any share in either; for if they say anything
else, they will contradict themselves.

STRANGER: I understand; but they will allow that if to know is active, then,
of course, to be known is passive. And on this view being, in so far as it is
known, is acted upon by knowledge, and is therefore in motion; for that which
is in a state of rest cannot be acted upon, as we affirm.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And, O heavens, can we ever be made to believe that motion and life
and soul and mind are not present with perfect being? Can we imagine that
being is devoid of life and mind, and exists in awful unmeaningness an
everlasting fixture?

THEAETETUS: That would be a dreadful thing to admit, Stranger.

STRANGER: But shall we say that has mind and not life?

THEAETETUS: How is that possible?

STRANGER: Or shall we say that both inhere in perfect being, but that it has
no soul which contains them?

THEAETETUS: And in what other way can it contain them?

STRANGER: Or that being has mind and life and soul, but although endowed with
soul remains absolutely unmoved?

THEAETETUS: All three suppositions appear to me to be irrational.

STRANGER: Under being, then, we must include motion, and that which is moved.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: Then, Theaetetus, our inference is, that if there is no motion,
neither is there any mind anywhere, or about anything or belonging to any one.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: And yet this equally follows, if we grant that all things are in
motion--upon this view too mind has no existence.

THEAETETUS: How so?

STRANGER: Do you think that sameness of condition and mode and subject could
ever exist without a principle of rest?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not.

STRANGER: Can you see how without them mind could exist, or come into
existence anywhere?

THEAETETUS: No.

STRANGER: And surely contend we must in every possible way against him who
would annihilate knowledge and reason and mind, and yet ventures to speak
confidently about anything.

THEAETETUS: Yes, with all our might.

STRANGER: Then the philosopher, who has the truest reverence for these
qualities, cannot possibly accept the notion of those who say that the whole
is at rest, either as unity or in many forms: and he will be utterly deaf to
those who assert universal motion. As children say entreatingly 'Give us
both,' so he will include both the moveable and immoveable in his definition
of being and all.

THEAETETUS: Most true.

STRANGER: And now, do we seem to have gained a fair notion of being?

THEAETETUS: Yes truly.

STRANGER: Alas, Theaetetus, methinks that we are now only beginning to see the
real difficulty of the enquiry into the nature of it.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: O my friend, do you not see that nothing can exceed our ignorance,
and yet we fancy that we are saying something good?

THEAETETUS: I certainly thought that we were; and I do not at all understand
how we never found out our desperate case.

STRANGER: Reflect: after having made these admissions, may we not be justly
asked the same questions which we ourselves were asking of those who said that
all was hot and cold?

THEAETETUS: What were they? Will you recall them to my mind?

STRANGER: To be sure I will, and I will remind you of them, by putting the
same questions to you which I did to them, and then we shall get on.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Would you not say that rest and motion are in the most entire
opposition to one another?

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: And yet you would say that both and either of them equally are?

THEAETETUS: I should.

STRANGER: And when you admit that both or either of them are, do you mean to
say that both or either of them are in motion?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not.

STRANGER: Or do you wish to imply that they are both at rest, when you say
that they are?

THEAETETUS: Of course not.

STRANGER: Then you conceive of being as some third and distinct nature, under
which rest and motion are alike included; and, observing that they both
participate in being, you declare that they are.

THEAETETUS: Truly we seem to have an intimation that being is some third
thing, when we say that rest and motion are.

STRANGER: Then being is not the combination of rest and motion, but something
different from them.

THEAETETUS: So it would appear.

STRANGER: Being, then, according to its own nature, is neither in motion nor
at rest.

THEAETETUS: That is very much the truth.

STRANGER: Where, then, is a man to look for help who would have any clear or
fixed notion of being in his mind?

THEAETETUS: Where, indeed?

STRANGER: I scarcely think that he can look anywhere; for that which is not in
motion must be at rest, and again, that which is not at rest must be in
motion; but being is placed outside of both these classes. Is this possible?

THEAETETUS: Utterly impossible.

STRANGER: Here, then, is another thing which we ought to bear in mind.

THEAETETUS: What?

STRANGER: When we were asked to what we were to assign the appellation of not-
being, we were in the greatest difficulty:--do you remember?

THEAETETUS: To be sure.

STRANGER: And are we not now in as great a difficulty about being?

THEAETETUS: I should say, Stranger, that we are in one which is, if possible,
even greater.

STRANGER: Then let us acknowledge the difficulty; and as being and not-being
are involved in the same perplexity, there is hope that when the one appears
more or less distinctly, the other will equally appear; and if we are able to
see neither, there may still be a chance of steering our way in between them,
without any great discredit.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: Let us enquire, then, how we come to predicate many names of the
same thing.

THEAETETUS: Give an example.

STRANGER: I mean that we speak of man, for example, under many names--that we
attribute to him colours and forms and magnitudes and virtues and vices, in
all of which instances and in ten thousand others we not only speak of him as
a man, but also as good, and having numberless other attributes, and in the
same way anything else which we originally supposed to be one is described by
us as many, and under many names.

THEAETETUS: That is true.

STRANGER: And thus we provide a rich feast for tyros, whether young or old;
for there is nothing easier than to argue that the one cannot be many, or the
many one; and great is their delight in denying that a man is good; for man,
they insist, is man and good is good. I dare say that you have met with
persons who take an interest in such matters--they are often elderly men,
whose meagre sense is thrown into amazement by these discoveries of theirs,
which they believe to be the height of wisdom.

THEAETETUS: Certainly, I have.

STRANGER: Then, not to exclude any one who has ever speculated at all upon the
nature of being, let us put our questions to them as well as to our former
friends.

THEAETETUS: What questions?

STRANGER: Shall we refuse to attribute being to motion and rest, or anything
to anything, and assume that they do not mingle, and are incapable of
participating in one another? Or shall we gather all into one class of things
communicable with one another? Or are some things communicable and others not?
--Which of these alternatives, Theaetetus, will they prefer?

THEAETETUS: I have nothing to answer on their behalf. Suppose that you take
all these hypotheses in turn, and see what are the consequences which follow
from each of them.

STRANGER: Very good, and first let us assume them to say that nothing is
capable of participating in anything else in any respect; in that case rest
and motion cannot participate in being at all.

THEAETETUS: They cannot.

STRANGER: But would either of them be if not participating in being?

THEAETETUS: No.

STRANGER: Then by this admission everything is instantly overturned, as well
the doctrine of universal motion as of universal rest, and also the doctrine
of those who distribute being into immutable and everlasting kinds; for all
these add on a notion of being, some affirming that things 'are' truly in
motion, and others that they 'are' truly at rest.

THEAETETUS: Just so.

STRANGER: Again, those who would at one time compound, and at another resolve
all things, whether making them into one and out of one creating infinity, or
dividing them into finite elements, and forming compounds out of these;
whether they suppose the processes of creation to be successive or continuous,
would be talking nonsense in all this if there were no admixture.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Most ridiculous of all will the men themselves be who want to carry
out the argument and yet forbid us to call anything, because participating in
some affection from another, by the name of that other.

THEAETETUS: Why so?

STRANGER: Why, because they are compelled to use the words 'to be,' 'apart,'
'from others,' 'in itself,' and ten thousand more, which they cannot give up,
but must make the connecting links of discourse; and therefore they do not
require to be refuted by others, but their enemy, as the saying is, inhabits
the same house with them; they are always carrying about with them an
adversary, like the wonderful ventriloquist, Eurycles, who out of their own
bellies audibly contradicts them.

THEAETETUS: Precisely so; a very true and exact illustration.

STRANGER: And now, if we suppose that all things have the power of communion
with one another--what will follow?

THEAETETUS: Even I can solve that riddle.

STRANGER: How?

THEAETETUS: Why, because motion itself would be at rest, and rest again in
motion, if they could be attributed to one another.

STRANGER: But this is utterly impossible.

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: Then only the third hypothesis remains.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: For, surely, either all things have communion with all; or nothing
with any other thing; or some things communicate with some things and others
not.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And two out of these three suppositions have been found to be
impossible.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Every one then, who desires to answer truly, will adopt the third
and remaining hypothesis of the communion of some with some.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: This communion of some with some may be illustrated by the case of
letters; for some letters do not fit each other, while others do.

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: And the vowels, especially, are a sort of bond which pervades all
the other letters, so that without a vowel one consonant cannot be joined to
another.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: But does every one know what letters will unite with what? Or is art
required in order to do so?

THEAETETUS: Art is required.

STRANGER: What art?

THEAETETUS: The art of grammar.

STRANGER: And is not this also true of sounds high and low?--Is not he who has
the art to know what sounds mingle, a musician, and he who is ignorant, not a
musician?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And we shall find this to be generally true of art or the absence of
art.

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: And as classes are admitted by us in like manner to be some of them
capable and others incapable of intermixture, must not he who would rightly
show what kinds will unite and what will not, proceed by the help of science
in the path of argument? And will he not ask if the connecting links are
universal, and so capable of intermixture with all things; and again, in
divisions, whether there are not other universal classes, which make them
possible?

THEAETETUS: To be sure he will require science, and, if I am not mistaken, the
very greatest of all sciences.

STRANGER: How are we to call it? By Zeus, have we not lighted unwittingly upon
our free and noble science, and in looking for the Sophist have we not
entertained the philosopher unawares?

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: Should we not say that the division according to classes, which
neither makes the same other, nor makes other the same, is the business of the
dialectical science?

THEAETETUS: That is what we should say.

STRANGER: Then, surely, he who can divide rightly is able to see clearly one
form pervading a scattered multitude, and many different forms contained under
one higher form; and again, one form knit together into a single whole and
pervading many such wholes, and many forms, existing only in separation and
isolation. This is the knowledge of classes which determines where they can
have communion with one another and where not.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: And the art of dialectic would be attributed by you only to the
philosopher pure and true?

THEAETETUS: Who but he can be worthy?

STRANGER: In this region we shall always discover the philosopher, if we look
for him; like the Sophist, he is not easily discovered, but for a different
reason.

THEAETETUS: For what reason?

STRANGER: Because the Sophist runs away into the darkness of not-being, in
which he has learned by habit to feel about, and cannot be discovered because
of the darkness of the place. Is not that true?

THEAETETUS: It seems to be so.

STRANGER: And the philosopher, always holding converse through reason with the
idea of being, is also dark from excess of light; for the souls of the many
have no eye which can endure the vision of the divine.

THEAETETUS: Yes; that seems to be quite as true as the other.

STRANGER: Well, the philosopher may hereafter be more fully considered by us,
if we are disposed; but the Sophist must clearly not be allowed to escape
until we have had a good look at him.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: Since, then, we are agreed that some classes have a communion with
one another, and others not, and some have communion with a few and others
with many, and that there is no reason why some should not have universal
communion with all, let us now pursue the enquiry, as the argument suggests,
not in relation to all ideas, lest the multitude of them should confuse us,
but let us select a few of those which are reckoned to be the principal ones,
and consider their several natures and their capacity of communion with one
another, in order that if we are not able to apprehend with perfect clearness
the notions of being and not-being, we may at least not fall short in the
consideration of them, so far as they come within the scope of the present
enquiry, if peradventure we may be allowed to assert the reality of not-being,
and yet escape unscathed.

THEAETETUS: We must do so.

STRANGER: The most important of all the genera are those which we were just
now mentioning--being and rest and motion.

THEAETETUS: Yes, by far.

STRANGER: And two of these are, as we affirm, incapable of communion with one
another.

THEAETETUS: Quite incapable.

STRANGER: Whereas being surely has communion with both of them, for both of
them are?

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: That makes up three of them.

THEAETETUS: To be sure.

STRANGER: And each of them is other than the remaining two, but the same with
itself.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: But then, what is the meaning of these two words, 'same' and
'other'? Are they two new kinds other than the three, and yet always of
necessity intermingling with them, and are we to have five kinds instead of
three; or when we speak of the same and other, are we unconsciously speaking
of one of the three first kinds?

THEAETETUS: Very likely we are.

STRANGER: But, surely, motion and rest are neither the other nor the same.

THEAETETUS: How is that?

STRANGER: Whatever we attribute to motion and rest in common, cannot be either
of them.

THEAETETUS: Why not?

STRANGER: Because motion would be at rest and rest in motion, for either of
them, being predicated of both, will compel the other to change into the
opposite of its own nature, because partaking of its opposite.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: Yet they surely both partake of the same and of the other?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Then we must not assert that motion, any more than rest, is either
the same or the other.

THEAETETUS: No; we must not.

STRANGER: But are we to conceive that being and the same are identical?

THEAETETUS: Possibly.

STRANGER: But if they are identical, then again in saying that motion and rest
have being, we should also be saying that they are the same.

THEAETETUS: Which surely cannot be.

STRANGER: Then being and the same cannot be one.

THEAETETUS: Scarcely.

STRANGER: Then we may suppose the same to be a fourth class, which is now to
be added to the three others.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: And shall we call the other a fifth class? Or should we consider
being and other to be two names of the same class?

THEAETETUS: Very likely.

STRANGER: But you would agree, if I am not mistaken, that existences are
relative as well as absolute?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And the other is always relative to other?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: But this would not be the case unless being and the other entirely
differed; for, if the other, like being, were absolute as well as relative,
then there would have been a kind of other which was not other than other. And
now we find that what is other must of necessity be what it is in relation to
some other.

THEAETETUS: That is the true state of the case.

STRANGER: Then we must admit the other as the fifth of our selected classes.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And the fifth class pervades all classes, for they all differ from
one another, not by reason of their own nature, but because they partake of
the idea of the other.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: Then let us now put the case with reference to each of the five.

THEAETETUS: How?

STRANGER: First there is motion, which we affirm to be absolutely 'other' than
rest: what else can we say?

THEAETETUS: It is so.

STRANGER: And therefore is not rest.

THEAETETUS: Certainly not.

STRANGER: And yet is, because partaking of being.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Again, motion is other than the same?

THEAETETUS: Just so.

STRANGER: And is therefore not the same.

THEAETETUS: It is not.

STRANGER: Yet, surely, motion is the same, because all things partake of the
same.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: Then we must admit, and not object to say, that motion is the same
and is not the same, for we do not apply the terms 'same' and 'not the same,'
in the same sense; but we call it the 'same,' in relation to itself, because
partaking of the same; and not the same, because having communion with the
other, it is thereby severed from the same, and has become not that but other,
and is therefore rightly spoken of as 'not the same.'

THEAETETUS: To be sure.

STRANGER: And if absolute motion in any point of view partook of rest, there
would be no absurdity in calling motion stationary.

THEAETETUS: Quite right,--that is, on the supposition that some classes mingle
with one another, and others not.

STRANGER: That such a communion of kinds is according to nature, we had
already proved before we arrived at this part of our discussion.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: Let us proceed, then. May we not say that motion is other than the
other, having been also proved by us to be other than the same and other than
rest?

THEAETETUS: That is certain.

STRANGER: Then, according to this view, motion is other and also not other?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: What is the next step? Shall we say that motion is other than the
three and not other than the fourth,--for we agreed that there are five
classes about and in the sphere of which we proposed to make enquiry?

THEAETETUS: Surely we cannot admit that the number is less than it appeared to
be just now.

STRANGER: Then we may without fear contend that motion is other than being?

THEAETETUS: Without the least fear.

STRANGER: The plain result is that motion, since it partakes of being, really
is and also is not?

THEAETETUS: Nothing can be plainer.

STRANGER: Then not-being necessarily exists in the case of motion and of every
class; for the nature of the other entering into them all, makes each of them
other than being, and so non-existent; and therefore of all of them, in like
manner, we may truly say that they are not; and again, inasmuch as they
partake of being, that they are and are existent.

THEAETETUS: So we may assume.

STRANGER: Every class, then, has plurality of being and infinity of not-being.

THEAETETUS: So we must infer.

STRANGER: And being itself may be said to be other than the other kinds.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: Then we may infer that being is not, in respect of as many other
things as there are; for not-being these it is itself one, and is not the
other things, which are infinite in number.

THEAETETUS: That is not far from the truth.

STRANGER: And we must not quarrel with this result, since it is of the nature
of classes to have communion with one another; and if any one denies our
present statement [viz., that being is not, etc.], let him first argue with
our former conclusion [i.e., respecting the communion of ideas], and then he
may proceed to argue with what follows.

THEAETETUS: Nothing can be fairer.

STRANGER: Let me ask you to consider a further question.

THEAETETUS: What question?

STRANGER: When we speak of not-being, we speak, I suppose, not of something
opposed to being, but only different.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: When we speak of something as not great, does the expression seem to
you to imply what is little any more than what is equal?

THEAETETUS: Certainly not.

STRANGER: The negative particles, ou and me, when prefixed to words, do not
imply opposition, but only difference from the words, or more correctly from
the things represented by the words, which follow them.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: There is another point to be considered, if you do not object.

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: The nature of the other appears to me to be divided into fractions
like knowledge.

THEAETETUS: How so?

STRANGER: Knowledge, like the other, is one; and yet the various parts of
knowledge have each of them their own particular name, and hence there are
many arts and kinds of knowledge.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: And is not the case the same with the parts of the other, which is
also one?

THEAETETUS: Very likely; but will you tell me how?

STRANGER: There is some part of the other which is opposed to the beautiful?

THEAETETUS: There is.

STRANGER: Shall we say that this has or has not a name?

THEAETETUS: It has; for whatever we call not-beautiful is other than the
beautiful, not than something else.

STRANGER: And now tell me another thing.

THEAETETUS: What?

STRANGER: Is the not-beautiful anything but this--an existence parted off from
a certain kind of existence, and again from another point of view opposed to
an existing something?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Then the not-beautiful turns out to be the opposition of being to
being?

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: But upon this view, is the beautiful a more real and the not-
beautiful a less real existence?

THEAETETUS: Not at all.

STRANGER: And the not-great may be said to exist, equally with the great?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And, in the same way, the just must be placed in the same category
with the not-just--the one cannot be said to have any more existence than the
other.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: The same may be said of other things; seeing that the nature of the
other has a real existence, the parts of this nature must equally be supposed
to exist.

THEAETETUS: Of course.

STRANGER: Then, as would appear, the opposition of a part of the other, and of
a part of being, to one another, is, if I may venture to say so, as truly
essence as being itself, and implies not the opposite of being, but only what
is other than being.

THEAETETUS: Beyond question.

STRANGER: What then shall we call it?

THEAETETUS: Clearly, not-being; and this is the very nature for which the
Sophist compelled us to search.

STRANGER: And has not this, as you were saying, as real an existence as any
other class? May I not say with confidence that not-being has an assured
existence, and a nature of its own? Just as the great was found to be great
and the beautiful beautiful, and the not-great not-great, and the not-
beautiful not-beautiful, in the same manner not-being has been found to be and
is not-being, and is to be reckoned one among the many classes of being. Do
you, Theaetetus, still feel any doubt of this?

THEAETETUS: None whatever.

STRANGER: Do you observe that our scepticism has carried us beyond the range
of Parmenides' prohibition?

THEAETETUS: In what?

STRANGER: We have advanced to a further point, and shown him more than he
forbad us to investigate.

THEAETETUS: How is that?

STRANGER: Why, because he says--

'Not-being never is, and do thou keep thy thoughts from this way of enquiry.'

THEAETETUS: Yes, he says so.

STRANGER: Whereas, we have not only proved that things which are not are, but
we have shown what form of being not-being is; for we have shown that the
nature of the other is, and is distributed over all things in their relations
to one another, and whatever part of the other is contrasted with being, this
is precisely what we have ventured to call not-being.

THEAETETUS: And surely, Stranger, we were quite right.

STRANGER: Let not any one say, then, that while affirming the opposition of
not-being to being, we still assert the being of not-being; for as to whether
there is an opposite of being, to that enquiry we have long said good-bye--it
may or may not be, and may or may not be capable of definition. But as
touching our present account of not-being, let a man either convince us of
error, or, so long as he cannot, he too must say, as we are saying, that there
is a communion of classes, and that being, and difference or other, traverse
all things and mutually interpenetrate, so that the other partakes of being,
and by reason of this participation is, and yet is not that of which it
partakes, but other, and being other than being, it is clearly a necessity
that not-being should be. And again, being, through partaking of the other,
becomes a class other than the remaining classes, and being other than all of
them, is not each one of them, and is not all the rest, so that undoubtedly
there are thousands upon thousands of cases in which being is not, and all
other things, whether regarded individually or collectively, in many respects
are, and in many respects are not.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And he who is sceptical of this contradiction, must think how he can
find something better to say; or if he sees a puzzle, and his pleasure is to
drag words this way and that, the argument will prove to him, that he is not
making a worthy use of his faculties; for there is no charm in such puzzles,
and there is no difficulty in detecting them; but we can tell him of something
else the pursuit of which is noble and also difficult.

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: A thing of which I have already spoken;--letting alone these puzzles
as involving no difficulty, he should be able to follow and criticize in
detail every argument, and when a man says that the same is in a manner other,
or that other is the same, to understand and refute him from his own point of
view, and in the same respect in which he asserts either of these affections.
But to show that somehow and in some sense the same is other, or the other
same, or the great small, or the like unlike; and to delight in always
bringing forward such contradictions, is no real refutation, but is clearly
the new-born babe of some one who is only beginning to approach the problem of
being.

THEAETETUS: To be sure.

STRANGER: For certainly, my friend, the attempt to separate all existences
from one another is a barbarism and utterly unworthy of an educated or
philosophical mind.

THEAETETUS: Why so?

STRANGER: The attempt at universal separation is the final annihilation of all
reasoning; for only by the union of conceptions with one another do we attain
to discourse of reason.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And, observe that we were only just in time in making a resistance
to such separatists, and compelling them to admit that one thing mingles with
another.

THEAETETUS: Why so?

STRANGER: Why, that we might be able to assert discourse to be a kind of
being; for if we could not, the worst of all consequences would follow; we
should have no philosophy. Moreover, the necessity for determining the nature
of discourse presses upon us at this moment; if utterly deprived of it, we
could no more hold discourse; and deprived of it we should be if we admitted
that there was no admixture of natures at all.

THEAETETUS: Very true. But I do not understand why at this moment we must
determine the nature of discourse.

STRANGER: Perhaps you will see more clearly by the help of the following
explanation.

THEAETETUS: What explanation?

STRANGER: Not-being has been acknowledged by us to be one among many classes
diffused over all being.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And thence arises the question, whether not-being mingles with
opinion and language.

THEAETETUS: How so?

STRANGER: If not-being has no part in the proposition, then all things must be
true; but if not-being has a part, then false opinion and false speech are
possible, for to think or to say what is not--is falsehood, which thus arises
in the region of thought and in speech.

THEAETETUS: That is quite true.

STRANGER: And where there is falsehood surely there must be deceit.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And if there is deceit, then all things must be full of idols and
images and fancies.

THEAETETUS: To be sure.

STRANGER: Into that region the Sophist, as we said, made his escape, and, when
he had got there, denied the very possibility of falsehood; no one, he argued,
either conceived or uttered falsehood, inasmuch as not-being did not in any
way partake of being.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And now, not-being has been shown to partake of being, and therefore
he will not continue fighting in this direction, but he will probably say that
some ideas partake of not-being, and some not, and that language and opinion
are of the non-partaking class; and he will still fight to the death against
the existence of the image-making and phantastic art, in which we have placed
him, because, as he will say, opinion and language do not partake of not-
being, and unless this participation exists, there can be no such thing as
falsehood. And, with the view of meeting this evasion, we must begin by
enquiring into the nature of language, opinion, and imagination, in order that
when we find them we may find also that they have communion with not-being,
and, having made out the connexion of them, may thus prove that falsehood
exists; and therein we will imprison the Sophist, if he deserves it, or, if
not, we will let him go again and look for him in another class.

THEAETETUS: Certainly, Stranger, there appears to be truth in what was said
about the Sophist at first, that he was of a class not easily caught, for he
seems to have abundance of defences, which he throws up, and which must every
one of them be stormed before we can reach the man himself. And even now, we
have with difficulty got through his first defence, which is the not-being of
not-being, and lo! here is another; for we have still to show that falsehood
exists in the sphere of language and opinion, and there will be another and
another line of defence without end.

STRANGER: Any one, Theaetetus, who is able to advance even a little ought to
be of good cheer, for what would he who is dispirited at a little progress do,
if he were making none at all, or even undergoing a repulse? Such a faint
heart, as the proverb says, will never take a city: but now that we have
succeeded thus far, the citadel is ours, and what remains is easier.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: Then, as I was saying, let us first of all obtain a conception of
language and opinion, in order that we may have clearer grounds for
determining, whether not-being has any concern with them, or whether they are
both always true, and neither of them ever false.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Then, now, let us speak of names, as before we were speaking of
ideas and letters; for that is the direction in which the answer may be
expected.

THEAETETUS: And what is the question at issue about names?

STRANGER: The question at issue is whether all names may be connected with one
another, or none, or only some of them.

THEAETETUS: Clearly the last is true.

STRANGER: I understand you to say that words which have a meaning when in
sequence may be connected, but that words which have no meaning when in
sequence cannot be connected?

THEAETETUS: What are you saying?

STRANGER: What I thought that you intended when you gave your assent; for
there are two sorts of intimation of being which are given by the voice.

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: One of them is called nouns, and the other verbs.

THEAETETUS: Describe them.

STRANGER: That which denotes action we call a verb.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And the other, which is an articulate mark set on those who do the
actions, we call a noun.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: A succession of nouns only is not a sentence, any more than of verbs
without nouns.

THEAETETUS: I do not understand you.

STRANGER: I see that when you gave your assent you had something else in your
mind. But what I intended to say was, that a mere succession of nouns or of
verbs is not discourse.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: I mean that words like 'walks,' 'runs,' 'sleeps,' or any other words
which denote action, however many of them you string together, do not make
discourse.

THEAETETUS: How can they?

STRANGER: Or, again, when you say 'lion,' 'stag,' 'horse,' or any other words
which denote agents--neither in this way of stringing words together do you
attain to discourse; for there is no expression of action or inaction, or of
the existence of existence or non-existence indicated by the sounds, until
verbs are mingled with nouns; then the words fit, and the smallest combination
of them forms language, and is the simplest and least form of discourse.

THEAETETUS: Again I ask, What do you mean?

STRANGER: When any one says 'A man learns,' should you not call this the
simplest and least of sentences?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Yes, for he now arrives at the point of giving an intimation about
something which is, or is becoming, or has become, or will be. And he not only
names, but he does something, by connecting verbs with nouns; and therefore we
say that he discourses, and to this connexion of words we give the name of
discourse.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And as there are some things which fit one another, and other things
which do not fit, so there are some vocal signs which do, and others which do
not, combine and form discourse.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: There is another small matter.

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: A sentence must and cannot help having a subject.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And must be of a certain quality.

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And now let us mind what we are about.

THEAETETUS: We must do so.

STRANGER: I will repeat a sentence to you in which a thing and an action are
combined, by the help of a noun and a verb; and you shall tell me of whom the
sentence speaks.

THEAETETUS: I will, to the best of my power.

STRANGER: 'Theaetetus sits'--not a very long sentence.

THEAETETUS: Not very.

STRANGER: Of whom does the sentence speak, and who is the subject? that is
what you have to tell.

THEAETETUS: Of me; I am the subject.

STRANGER: Or this sentence, again--

THEAETETUS: What sentence?

STRANGER: 'Theaetetus, with whom I am now speaking, is flying.'

THEAETETUS: That also is a sentence which will be admitted by every one to
speak of me, and to apply to me.

STRANGER: We agreed that every sentence must necessarily have a certain
quality.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And what is the quality of each of these two sentences?

THEAETETUS: The one, as I imagine, is false, and the other true.

STRANGER: The true says what is true about you?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And the false says what is other than true?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And therefore speaks of things which are not as if they were?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And say that things are real of you which are not; for, as we were
saying, in regard to each thing or person, there is much that is and much that
is not.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: The second of the two sentences which related to you was first of
all an example of the shortest form consistent with our definition.

THEAETETUS: Yes, this was implied in recent admission.

STRANGER: And, in the second place, it related to a subject?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Who must be you, and can be nobody else?

THEAETETUS: Unquestionably.

STRANGER: And it would be no sentence at all if there were no subject, for, as
we proved, a sentence which has no subject is impossible.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: When other, then, is asserted of you as the same, and not-being as
being, such a combination of nouns and verbs is really and truly false
discourse.

THEAETETUS: Most true.

STRANGER: And therefore thought, opinion, and imagination are now proved to
exist in our minds both as true and false.

THEAETETUS: How so?

STRANGER: You will know better if you first gain a knowledge of what they are,
and in what they severally differ from one another.

THEAETETUS: Give me the knowledge which you would wish me to gain.

STRANGER: Are not thought and speech the same, with this exception, that what
is called thought is the unuttered conversation of the soul with herself?

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: But the stream of thought which flows through the lips and is
audible is called speech?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And we know that there exists in speech...

THEAETETUS: What exists?

STRANGER: Affirmation.

THEAETETUS: Yes, we know it.

STRANGER: When the affirmation or denial takes Place in silence and in the
mind only, have you any other name by which to call it but opinion?

THEAETETUS: There can be no other name.

STRANGER: And when opinion is presented, not simply, but in some form of
sense, would you not call it imagination?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: And seeing that language is true and false, and that thought is the
conversation of the soul with herself, and opinion is the end of thinking, and
imagination or phantasy is the union of sense and opinion, the inference is
that some of them, since they are akin to language, should have an element of
falsehood as well as of truth?

THEAETETUS: Certainly.

STRANGER: Do you perceive, then, that false opinion and speech have been
discovered sooner than we expected?--For just now we seemed to be undertaking
a task which would never be accomplished.

THEAETETUS: I perceive.

STRANGER: Then let us not be discouraged about the future; but now having made
this discovery, let us go back to our previous classification.

THEAETETUS: What classification?

STRANGER: We divided image-making into two sorts; the one likeness-making, the
other imaginative or phantastic.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And we said that we were uncertain in which we should place the
Sophist.

THEAETETUS: We did say so.

STRANGER: And our heads began to go round more and more when it was asserted
that there is no such thing as an image or idol or appearance, because in no
manner or time or place can there ever be such a thing as falsehood.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And now, since there has been shown to be false speech and false
opinion, there may be imitations of real existences, and out of this condition
of the mind an art of deception may arise.

THEAETETUS: Quite possible.

STRANGER: And we have already admitted, in what preceded, that the Sophist was
lurking in one of the divisions of the likeness-making art?

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Let us, then, renew the attempt, and in dividing any class, always
take the part to the right, holding fast to that which holds the Sophist,
until we have stripped him of all his common properties, and reached his
difference or peculiar. Then we may exhibit him in his true nature, first to
ourselves and then to kindred dialectical spirits.

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: You may remember that all art was originally divided by us into
creative and acquisitive.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And the Sophist was flitting before us in the acquisitive class, in
the subdivisions of hunting, contests, merchandize, and the like.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: But now that the imitative art has enclosed him, it is clear that we
must begin by dividing the art of creation; for imitation is a kind of
creation--of images, however, as we affirm, and not of real things.

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: In the first place, there are two kinds of creation.

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: One of them is human and the other divine.

THEAETETUS: I do not follow.

STRANGER: Every power, as you may remember our saying originally, which causes
things to exist, not previously existing, was defined by us as creative.

THEAETETUS: I remember.

STRANGER: Looking, now, at the world and all the animals and plants, at things
which grow upon the earth from seeds and roots, as well as at inanimate
substances which are formed within the earth, fusile or non-fusile, shall we
say that they come into existence--not having existed previously--by the
creation of God, or shall we agree with vulgar opinion about them?

THEAETETUS: What is it?

STRANGER: The opinion that nature brings them into being from some spontaneous
and unintelligent cause. Or shall we say that they are created by a divine
reason and a knowledge which comes from God?

THEAETETUS: I dare say that, owing to my youth, I may often waver in my view,
but now when I look at you and see that you incline to refer them to God, I
defer to your authority.

STRANGER: Nobly said, Theaetetus, and if I thought that you were one of those
who would hereafter change your mind, I would have gently argued with you, and
forced you to assent; but as I perceive that you will come of yourself and
without any argument of mine, to that belief which, as you say, attracts you,
I will not forestall the work of time. Let me suppose, then, that things which
are said to be made by nature are the work of divine art, and that things
which are made by man out of these are works of human art. And so there are
two kinds of making and production, the one human and the other divine.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Then, now, subdivide each of the two sections which we have already.

THEAETETUS: How do you mean?

STRANGER: I mean to say that you should make a vertical division of production
or invention, as you have already made a lateral one.

THEAETETUS: I have done so.

STRANGER: Then, now, there are in all four parts or segments--two of them have
reference to us and are human, and two of them have reference to the gods and
are divine.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And, again, in the division which was supposed to be made in the
other way, one part in each subdivision is the making of the things
themselves, but the two remaining parts may be called the making of
likenesses; and so the productive art is again divided into two parts.

THEAETETUS: Tell me the divisions once more.

STRANGER: I suppose that we, and the other animals, and the elements out of
which things are made--fire, water, and the like--are known by us to be each
and all the creation and work of God.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: And there are images of them, which are not them, but which
correspond to them; and these are also the creation of a wonderful skill.

THEAETETUS: What are they?

STRANGER: The appearances which spring up of themselves in sleep or by day,
such as a shadow when darkness arises in a fire, or the reflection which is
produced when the light in bright and smooth objects meets on their surface
with an external light, and creates a perception the opposite of our ordinary
sight.

THEAETETUS: Yes; and the images as well as the creation are equally the work
of a divine hand.

STRANGER: And what shall we say of human art? Do we not make one house by the
art of building, and another by the art of drawing, which is a sort of dream
created by man for those who are awake?

THEAETETUS: Quite true.

STRANGER: And other products of human creation are also twofold and go in
pairs; there is the thing, with which the art of making the thing is
concerned, and the image, with which imitation is concerned.

THEAETETUS: Now I begin to understand, and am ready to acknowledge that there
are two kinds of production, and each of them twofold; in the lateral division
there is both a divine and a human production; in the vertical there are
realities and a creation of a kind of similitudes.

STRANGER: And let us not forget that of the imitative class the one part was
to have been likeness-making, and the other phantastic, if it could be shown
that falsehood is a reality and belongs to the class of real being.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: And this appeared to be the case; and therefore now, without
hesitation, we shall number the different kinds as two.

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Then, now, let us again divide the phantastic art.

THEAETETUS: Where shall we make the division?

STRANGER: There is one kind which is produced by an instrument, and another in
which the creator of the appearance is himself the instrument.

THEAETETUS: What do you mean?

STRANGER: When any one makes himself appear like another in his figure or his
voice, imitation is the name for this part of the phantastic art.

THEAETETUS: Yes.

STRANGER: Let this, then, be named the art of mimicry, and this the province
assigned to it; as for the other division, we are weary and will give that up,
leaving to some one else the duty of making the class and giving it a suitable
name.

THEAETETUS: Let us do as you say--assign a sphere to the one and leave the
other.

STRANGER: There is a further distinction, Theaetetus, which is worthy of our
consideration, and for a reason which I will tell you.

THEAETETUS: Let me hear.

STRANGER: There are some who imitate, knowing what they imitate, and some who
do not know. And what line of distinction can there possibly be greater than
that which divides ignorance from knowledge?

THEAETETUS: There can be no greater.

STRANGER: Was not the sort of imitation of which we spoke just now the
imitation of those who know? For he who would imitate you would surely know
you and your figure?

THEAETETUS: Naturally.

STRANGER: And what would you say of the figure or form of justice or of virtue
in general? Are we not well aware that many, having no knowledge of either,
but only a sort of opinion, do their best to show that this opinion is really
entertained by them, by expressing it, as far as they can, in word and deed?

THEAETETUS: Yes, that is very common.

STRANGER: And do they always fail in their attempt to be thought just, when
they are not? Or is not the very opposite true?

THEAETETUS: The very opposite.

STRANGER: Such a one, then, should be described as an imitator--to be
distinguished from the other, as he who is ignorant is distinguished from him
who knows?

THEAETETUS: True.

STRANGER: Can we find a suitable name for each of them? This is clearly not an
easy task; for among the ancients there was some confusion of ideas, which
prevented them from attempting to divide genera into species; wherefore there
is no great abundance of names. Yet, for the sake of distinctness, I will make
bold to call the imitation which coexists with opinion, the imitation of
appearance--that which coexists with science, a scientific or learned
imitation.

THEAETETUS: Granted.

STRANGER: The former is our present concern, for the Sophist was classed with
imitators indeed, but not among those who have knowledge.

THEAETETUS: Very true.

STRANGER: Let us, then, examine our imitator of appearance, and see whether he
is sound, like a piece of iron, or whether there is still some crack in him.

THEAETETUS: Let us examine him.

STRANGER: Indeed there is a very considerable crack; for if you look, you find
that one of the two classes of imitators is a simple creature, who thinks that
he knows that which he only fancies; the other sort has knocked about among
arguments, until he suspects and fears that he is ignorant of that which to
the many he pretends to know.

THEAETETUS: There are certainly the two kinds which you describe.

STRANGER: Shall we regard one as the simple imitator--the other as the
dissembling or ironical imitator?

THEAETETUS: Very good.

STRANGER: And shall we further speak of this latter class as having one or two
divisions?

THEAETETUS: Answer yourself.

STRANGER: Upon consideration, then, there appear to me to be two; there is the
dissembler, who harangues a multitude in public in a long speech, and the
dissembler, who in private and in short speeches compels the person who is
conversing with him to contradict himself.

THEAETETUS: What you say is most true.

STRANGER: And who is the maker of the longer speeches? Is he the statesman or
the popular orator?

THEAETETUS: The latter.

STRANGER: And what shall we call the other? Is he the philosopher or the
Sophist?

THEAETETUS: The philosopher he cannot be, for upon our view he is ignorant;
but since he is an imitator of the wise he will have a name which is formed by
an adaptation of the word sophos. What shall we name him? I am pretty sure
that I cannot be mistaken in terming him the true and very Sophist.

STRANGER: Shall we bind up his name as we did before, making a chain from one
end of his genealogy to the other?

THEAETETUS: By all means.

STRANGER: He, then, who traces the pedigree of his art as follows--who,
belonging to the conscious or dissembling section of the art of causing self-
contradiction, is an imitator of appearance, and is separated from the class
of phantastic which is a branch of image-making into that further division of
creation, the juggling of words, a creation human, and not divine--any one who
affirms the real Sophist to be of this blood and lineage will say the very
truth.

THEAETETUS: Undoubtedly.

  
  
  
  

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
SOPHIST ***
    
    
    This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
            http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/3/1735/
    
    Produced by Sue Asscher, and David Widger
    
    Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
    will be renamed.
    
    Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
    one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
     can copy and distribute it in the United States without
    permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
    set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
    copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
    protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
    Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
    charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
    do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
    rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
    such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
    research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
    practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
    subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
    redistribution.
    
    
    
: FULL LICENSE ***
    
    THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
    PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
    
    To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
    distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
    or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
    Gutenberg", you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
    Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
    http://gutenberg.org/license.
    
    
    Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
    electronic works
    
    1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
    electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
    and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
     agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
    the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
    all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
    If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
    Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
    terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
    entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
    
    1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
    used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
    agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
    things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
    even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
    paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
    Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
    and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
    works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
    
    1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation "the Foundation"
    or PGLAF, owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
    Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
    collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
    individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
    located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
    copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
    works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
    are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
    Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
    freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
    this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
    the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
    keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
    Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
    
    1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
    what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
    a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
    the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
    before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
    creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
    Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
    the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
    States.
    
    1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
    
    1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
    access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
    whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work any work on which the
    phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
    Gutenberg" is associated is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
    copied or distributed:
    
    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
    re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
    with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
    
    1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
    from the public domain does not contain a notice indicating that it is
    posted with permission of the copyright holder, the work can be copied
    and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
    or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
    with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
    work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
    through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
    Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
    1.E.9.
    
    1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
    with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
    must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
    terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
    to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
    permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
    
    1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
    License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
    work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
    
    1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
    electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
    prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
    active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
    Gutenberg-tm License.
    
    1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
    compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
    word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
    distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
    "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
    posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site ,
    you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
    copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
    request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
    form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
    License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
    
    1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
    performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
    unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
    
    1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
    access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
    that
    
    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
         the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
         owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
         has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
         Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
         must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
         prepare  your periodic tax
         returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
         sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
         address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
         the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
    
    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
         you in writing  within 30 days of receipt that s/he
         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
         License.  You must require such a user to return or
         destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
         and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
         Project Gutenberg-tm works.
    
    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
         money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
         of receipt of the work.
    
    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
         distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
    
    1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
    electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
    forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
    both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
    Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
    Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
    
    1.F.
    
    1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
    effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
    public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
    collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
    works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
    "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
    corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
    property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
    computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
    your equipment.
    
    1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
    of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
    Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
    Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
    liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
    fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
    LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
    PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
    TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
    LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
    INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
    DAMAGE.
    
    1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
    defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
    receive a refund of the money  you paid for it by sending a
    written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
    received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
    your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
    the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
    refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
    providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
    receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
    is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
    opportunities to fix the problem.
    
    1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
    in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
    WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
    
    1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
    warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
    If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
    law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
    interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
    the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
    provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
    
    1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
    trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
    providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
    with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
    promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
    harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
    that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
    or cause to occur:  distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
    work,  alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
    Project Gutenberg-tm work, and  any Defect you cause.
    
    
    Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
    
    Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
    electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
    including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
    because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
    people in all walks of life.
    
    Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
    assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
    goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
    remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
    and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
    To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
    and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
    and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
    
    
    Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
    Foundation
    
    The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
    501 educational corporation organized under the laws of the
    state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
    Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
    number is 64-6221541.  Its 501 letter is posted at
    http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
    permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
    
    The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
    Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
    throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
    809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116,  596-1887, email
    business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
    information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
    page at http://pglaf.org
    
    For additional contact information:
         Dr. Gregory B. Newby
         Chief Executive and Director
         gbnewby@pglaf.org
    
    
    Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation
    
    Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
    spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
    increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
    freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
    array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
     are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
    status with the IRS.
    
    The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
    charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
    States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
    considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
    with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
    where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
    SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
    particular state visit http://pglaf.org
    
    While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
    have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
    against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
    approach us with offers to donate.
    
    International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
    any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
    outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
    
    Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
    methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
    ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
    To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
    
    
    Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
    works.
    
    Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
    concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
    with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
    Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
    
    
    Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
    editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
    unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
    keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
    
    
    Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
    
         http://www.gutenberg.org
    
    This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
    including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
    Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
    subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
    
    
    

